---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 356
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Work, Action and Society=Act and Essence
  - 859
By: The Russian Pilgrim
---
The man who lives in silent solitude is not only not living in a state
of inactivity and idleness： he is in the highest degree active, even
more than the one who takes part in the life of society. He untiringly
acts according to his highest rational nature; he is on guard： he
ponders; he keeps his eye upon the state and progress of his moral
existence. This is the true purpose of silence. And in the measure
that this ministers to his own improvement it benefits others for whom
undistracted submergence within themselves for the development of the
moral life is impossible. ... And he does more, and that of a higher
kind, than the private benefactor, because the private, emotional
charities of people in the world are always limited by the small
number of benefits conferred, whereas he who confers benefits by
morally attaining to convincing and tested means of perfecting the
spiritual life becomes a benefactor of whole peoples. ... The silent
recluse teaches by his very silence, and by his very life he benefits,
edifies and persuades to the search for God.  This benefit springs
from genuine silence which is illuminated and sanctified by the light
of grace. But if the silent one did not have these gifts of grace
which make him a light to the world, even if he should have embarked
upon the way of silence with the purpose of hiding himself from the
society of his kind as the result of sloth and indifference, even then
he would confer a great benefit upon the community in which he lives,
just as the gardener cuts off dry and barren branches and clears away
the weeds so that the growth of the best and most useful may be
unimpeded. And this is a great deal. It is of general benefit that the
silent one by his seclusion removes the temptations which would
inevitably arise from his unedifying life among people and be
injurious to the morals of his neighbours.
