---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 20 - ䷓ - Kuan
    Line: 5
    Page: 136-137
By: Juan Montalvo
---
One day a boy climbed to the heights of Pichincha; he was only a child, yet
he knew where he was, and had his head and his heart full of the battle. The
mountain in the clouds, with its scarf of mist falling down to its waist,
seemed a masked giant, terrifying. The city of Quito, at its feet, lifted
its thousand towers to heaven： the green hills of this lovely city,
fresh and graceful, surround her like gigantic uncut emeralds, set with
apparent carelessness in her broad girdle. Rome, the city of hills, has
neither so many nor more beautiful ones. A sound barely reached the heights;
it was confused, vague, fantastic, that sound composed [of] a thousand
sounds, that voice composed of a thousand voices, always emanating and
ascending from great towns! The ringing of bells, the beat of hammers,
the neighing of horses, the barking of dogs, the creaking of carts, and
the thousand laments coming from no one knows where, sighs of shadows,
uttered perhaps by hunger from its fireless dwelling and rising on high to
mingle with the daughter of pleasure and infect it with melancholy. The
boy heard, heard with his eyes and with his soul, heard the silence, as
it says in the Scriptures; he heard the past, he heard the battle. Where
had Sucre been? Perhaps here, on this very spot, on this green stair;
there is where he passed by, farther over is where he broke into a run,
and finally, on that side he shot at the fleeing Spaniards.

The boy caught sight of a white bone, a bone half hidden amid the grass
and the wildflowers; he went over and picked it up. Had it belonged to
one of the royalists? Had it belonged to one of the patriots? Was it a
holy or an accursed bone? Child, do not say that! There may have been
accursed men; there are no accursed bones. You should know that death,
although cold as ice, is a fire which purifies the body; first it corrupts
it, decomposes it, dissolves it; then it deodorizes and cleanses it.

The bones of the dead, washed by the rain, shaped by the air, polished by
the hand of time, are the remains of the human race, not of this or that
man. No, the bones of our enemies are not enemy bones; they are the remains
of our fellow men. Child, do not throw this away in disdain. ... The bones
of our fathers who died on Pichincha are now the prize of nothingness;
their very dust has taken a more subtle form, turned into spirit, and
disappeared into the invisible amphora in which eternity gathers the
members of the human race.
