---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 112-132
  Source:
    Title: Kundalini - The Evolutionary Energy in Man
By: Gopi Krishna
---
One morning during the Christmas of 1937 I sat cross-legged in a small
room in a little house on the outskirts of the town ofIammu, the winter
capital of the Iammu and Kashmir State in northern India. I was meditating
with my face towards the window on the east through which the first grey
streaks of the slowly brightening dawn fell into the room. Long practice
had accustomed me to sit in the same posture for hours at a time without
the least discomfort, and I sat breathing slowly and rhythmically, my
attention drawn towards the crown of my head, contemplating an imaginary
lotus in full bloom, radiating light.

I sat steadily, unmoving and erect, my thoughts uninterruptedly centred
on the shining lotus, intent on keeping my attention from wandering
and bringing it back again and again whenever it moved in any other
direction. The intensity of concentration interrupted my breathing;
gradually it slowed down to such an extent that at times it was barely
perceptible. My whole being was so engrossed in the contemplation of the
lotus that for several minutes at a time I lost touch with my body and
surroundings. During such intervals I used to feel as ifI were poised in
mid-air, without any feeling of a body around me. The only object of which
I was aware was a lotus of brilliant colour, emitting rays of light. This
experience has happened to many people who practise meditation in any
form regularly for a sufficient length of time, but what followed on that
fateful morning in my case, changing the whole course of my life and
outlook, has happened to few.

During one such spell ofintense concentration I suddenly felt a strange
sensation below the base of the spine, at the place touching the seat, while
I sat cross-legged on a folded blanket spread on the floor. The sensation
was so extraordinary and so pleasing that my attention was forcibly drawn
towards it. The moment my attention was thus unexpectedly withdrawn from
the point on which it was focused, the sensation ceased. Thinking it to be a
trick played by my imagination to relax the tension, I dismissed the matter
from my mind and brought my attention back to the point from which it had
wandered. Again I fixed it on the lotus, and as the image grew clear and
distinct at the top of my head, again the sensation occurred. This time
I tried to maintain the fixity of my attention and succeeded for a few
seconds, but the sensation extending upward grew so intense and was so
extraordinary, as compared to anything I had experienced before, that in
spite of myself my mind went towards it, and at that very moment it again
disappeared. I was now convinced that something unusual had happened for
which my daily practice of concentration was probably responsible.

I had read glowing accounts, written by learned men, of great benefits
resulting from concentration, and of the miraculous powers acquired by
yogis through such exercises. My heart began to beat wildly, and I found it
difficult to bring my attention to the required degree of fixity. After a
while I grew composed and was soon as deep in meditation as before. When
completely immersed I again experienced the sensation, but this time,
instead of allowing my mind to leave the point where I had fixed it,
I maintained a rigidity of attention throughout. The sensation again
extended upward, growing in intensity, and I felt myself wavering; but
with a great effort I kept my attention centred round the lotus. Suddenly,
with a roar like that of a waterfall, I felt a stream of liquid light
entering my brain through the spinal cord.

Entirely unprepared for such a development, I was completely taken by
surprise; but regaining self-control instantaneously, I remained sitting
in the same posture, keeping my mind on the point of concentration. The
illumination grew brighter and brighter, the roaring louder, I experienced
a rocking sensation and then felt myself slipping out of my body, entirely
enveloped in a halo oflight. It is impossible to describe the experience
accurately. I felt the point of consciousness that was myself growing wider,
surrounded by waves of light. It grew wider and wider, spreading outward
while the body, normally the immediate object ofits perception, appeared
to have receded into the distance until I became entirely unconscious
ofit. I was now all consciousness, without any outline, without any idea
of a corporeal appendage, without any feeling or sensation coming from the
senses, immersed in a sea of light simultaneously conscious and aware of
every point, spread out, as it were, in all directions without any barrier
or material obstruction. I was no longer myself, or to be more accurate,
no longer as I knew myself to be, a small point of awareness confined in
a body, but instead was a vast circle of consciousness in which the body
was but a point, bathed in light and in a state ofexaltation and happiness
impossible to describe.

After some time, the duration of which I could not judge, the circle began
to narrow down; I felt myself contracting, becoming smaller and smaller,
until I again became dimly conscious of the outline of my body, then more
clearly; and as I slipped back to my old condition, I became suddenly aware
of the noises in the street, felt again my arms and legs and head, and
once more became my narrow self in touch with body and surroundings. When
I opened my eyes and looked about, I felt a little dazed and bewildered,
as if coming back from a strange land completely foreign to me. The sun
had risen and was shining full on my face, warm and soothing. I tried to
lift my hands, which always rested in my lap, one upon the other, during
meditation. My arms felt limp and lifeless. With an effort I raised them
up and stretched them to enable the blood to How freely. Then I tried to
free my legs from the posture in which I was sitting and to place them
in a more comfortable position but could not. They were heavy and stiff
With the help of my hands I freed them and stretched them out, then put
my back against the wall, reclining in a position of ease and comfort.

What had happened to me? Was I the victim of a hallucination? Or
had I by some strange vagary of fate succeeded in experiencing the
Transcendental? Had I really succeeded where millions of others had
failed? Was there, after all, really some truth in the oft-repeated
claim of the sages and ascetics of India, made for thousands of years and
verified and repeated generation after generation, that it was possible to
apprehend reality in this life if one followed certain rules of conduct
and practised meditation in a certain way? My thoughts were in a daze. I
could hardly believe that I had a vision of divinity. There had been an
expansion of my own self, my own consciousness, and the transformation had
been brought about by the vital current that had started from below the
spine and found access to my brain through the backbone. I recalled that
I had read long ago in books on Yoga of a certain vital mechanism called
Kundalini, connected with the lower end of the spine, which becomes active
by means of certain exercises, and when once roused carries the limited
human consciousness to transcendental heights, endowing the individual
with incredible psychic and mental powers. Had I been lucky enough to
find the key to this wonderful mechanism, which was wrapped up in the
legendary mist of ages, about which people talked and whispered without
having once seen it in action in themselves or in others? I tried once
again to repeat the experience, but was so weak and flabbergasted that
I could not collect my thoughts sufficiently enough to induce a state
of concentration. My mind was in a ferment. I looked at the sun. Could
it be that in my condition ofextreme concentration I had mistaken it for
the effulgent halo that had surrounded me in the superconscious state.>
I closed my eyes again, allowing the rays of the sun to play upon my
face. No, the glow that I could perceive across my closed eyelids was
quite different. It was external and had not that splendor. The light I
had experienced was internal, an integral part of enlarged consciousness,
a part of my self.

I stood up. My legs felt weak and tottered under me. It seemed as ifmy
vitality had been drained out. My arms were no better. I massaged my
thighs and legs gently, and, feeling a little better, slowly walked
downstairs. Saying nothing to my wife, I took my meal in silence and left
for work. My appetite was not as keen as usual, my mouth appeared dry, and
I could not put my thoughts into my work in the office. I was in a state
of exhaustion and lassitude, disinclined to talk. After a while, feeling
suffocated and ill at ease, I left for a short walk in the street with
the idea of finding diversion for my thoughts. My mind reverted again and
again to the experience of the morning, trying to recreate in imagination
the marvellous phenomenon I had witnessed, but without success. My body,
especially the legs, still felt weak, and I could not walk for long. I took
no interest in the people whom I met, and walked with a sense of detachment
and indifference to my surroundings quite foreign to me. I returned to
my desk sooner than I had intended, and passed the remaining hours toying
with my pen and papers, unable to compose my thoughts sufficiently to work.

When I returned home in the afternoon I felt no better. I could not bring
myself to sit down and read, my usual habit in the evening. I ate supper
in silence, without appetite or relish, and retired to bed. Usually I
was asleep within minutes of putting my head to the pillow, but this
night I felt strangely restless and disturbed. I could not reconcile
the exaltation of the morning with the depression that sat heavily on
me while I tossed from side to side on the bed. I had an unaccountable
feeling of fear and uncertainty. At last in the midst of misgivings
I fell asleep. I slept fitfully, dreaming strange dreams, and woke up
after short intervals in sharp contrast to my usual deep, uninterrupted
sleep. After about 3 a.m, sleep refused to come. I sat up in bed for some
time. Sleep had not refreshed me. I still felt fatigued and my thoughts
lacked clarity. The usual time for my meditation was approaching. I decided
to begin earlier so that I would not have the sun on my hands and lace,
and without disturbing my wife, went upstairs to my study. I spread the
blanket and, sitting cross-legged as usual, began to meditate.

I could not concentrate with the same intensity as on the previous day,
though I tried my best. My thoughts wandered, and instead of being in a
state of happy expectancy I felt strangely nervous and uneasy. At last,
after repeated efforts, I held my attention at the usual point for some
time, waiting for results. Nothing happened and I began to feel doubts
about the validity of my previous experience. I tried again, this time
with better success. Pulling myself together, I steadied my wandering
thoughts, and fixing my attention on the crown, tried to visualize a
lotus in full bloom as was my custom. As soon as I arrived at the usual
pitch of mental fixity, I again felt the current moving upward. I did not
allow my attention to waver, and again with a rush and a roaring noise
in my ears the stream of effulgent light entered my brain, filling me
with power and vitality, and I felt myself expanding in all directions,
spreading beyond the boundaries of flesh, entirely absorbed in the
contemplation of a brilliant conscious glow, one with it and yet not
entirely merged in it. The condition lasted for a shorter duration than
it had done yesterday. The feeling of exaltation was not so strong. When
I came back to normal, I felt my heart thumping wildly and there was a
bitter taste in my mouth. It seemed as if a scorching blast of hot air
had passed through my body. The feeling of exhaustion and weariness was
more pronounced than it had been yesterday.

I rested for some time to recover my strength and poise. It was still
dark. I had now no doubts that the experience was real and that the sun
had nothing to do with the internal lustre that I saw. But, why did I feel
uneasy and depressed? Instead of feeling exceedingly happy at my luck and
blessing my stars, why had despondency overtaken me? I felt as ifI were in
imminent danger ofsomething beyond my understanding and power, something
intangible and mysterious, which I could neither grasp nor analyse. A
heavy cloud of depression and gloom seemed to hang round me, rising
from my own internal depths without relation to external circumstances,
I did not feel I was the same man I had been but a few days before, and a
condition of horror, on account of the inexplicable change, began to settle
on me, from which, try as I might, I could not make myself free by any
effort of my will. Little did I realize that from that day onwards I was
never to be my old normal selfagain, that I had unwittingly and without
preparation or even adequate knowledge ofit roused to activity the most
wonderful and stern power in man, that I had stepped unknowingly upon the
key to the most guarded secret of the ancients, and that thenceforth for
a long time I had to live suspended by a thread, swinging between life
on the one hand and death on the other, between sanity and insanity,
between light and darkness, between heaven and earth.

 ...

The sudden awakening of Kundalini in one whose nervous system has reached
the ripe stage of development as a result of favourable heredity, correct
mode of living, and proper mental application, is often liable to create a
most bewildering effect on the mind. The reason for it, though extremely
simple, may not be easily acceptable to the present-day intellect, which
treats the human mind as a finally sealed product, dependent, according
to some, exclusively on the activity of the brain cells, beginning and
ending with the body; according to others, on the responsiveness of the
bone-shielded grey and white matter to the extremely subtle all-pervading
cosmic mind or Universal spirit; and according to still others, on the
existence of an immortal individual soul in the body. Without entering
into a discussion of the correctness of these hypotheses advanced to
account for the existence of mind, it is sufficient for our purpose
to say that according to the authorities on Yoga, the activity of the
brain and the nervous system, irrespective of whether it proceeds from
an eternal self-existing spiritual source or from an embodied soul,
depends on the existence in the body of a subtle life element known as
pram, which pervades each cell of every tissue and fluid in the organism,
much in the same way that electricity pervades each atom of a battery.

This vital element has a biological counterpart as thought has a biological
complement in the brain, in the shape of an extremely fine biochemical
essence of a highly delicate and volatile nature, extracted by the nerves
from the surrounding organic mass. After extraction, this vital essence
resides in the brain and the nervous system, and is capable of generating
a subtle radiation impossible to isolate by laboratory analysis. It
circulates in the organism as motor impulse and sensation, conducting
all the organic functions of the body, permeated and worked by the
super-intelligent cosmic life energy, or pram, by which it is continuously
affected, just as the sensitive chemical layer on a photographic plate
is affected by light. The term prana, as used by authorities on Yoga,
signifies both the cosmic life energy and its subtle biological conductor
in the body, the two being inseparable. At the very moment the body dies,
the rare organic essence immediately undergoes chemical changes, ceasing
to serve as a channel for the former in the previous capacity. Normally,
the work of extraction ofpmna to feed the brain is done by a limited group
of nerves, operating in a circumscribed area of the organism, with the
result that the consciousness of an individual displays no variation in
its nature or extent during the span of his life, exhibiting a constancy
which is in sharp contrast to the continuously changing appearance of
his body. With the awakening of Kundalini, the arrangement suffers a
radical alteration affecting the entire nervous system, as a result of
which other and more extensive groups of nerves are stirred to activity,
leading to the transmission of an enormously enhanced supply of a more
concentrated form of pranic radiation into the brain drawn from a vastly
increased area of the body. The far-reaching effects of this immensely
augmented flow of a new form of vital current into the cephalic cavity
through the spinal cord before the system becomes fully accustomed to it
may be visualized by considering the effects of a sudden increase in the
flow of blood to the brain such as faintness, complete insensibility,
excitement, irritability, or, in extreme cases, delirium, paralysis, death.

The awakening may be gradual or sudden, varying in intensity and effect
according to the development, constitution, and temperament of different
individuals; but in most cases it results in a greater instability of the
emotional nature and a greater liability to aberrant mental conditions in
the subject, mainly owing to tainted heredity, faulty modes of conduct,
or immoderation in any shape or form. Leaving out the extreme cases, which
end in madness, this generalization applies to all the categories of men
in whom Kundalini is congenitally more or less active, comprising mystics,
mediums, men of genius, and those of an exceptionally high intellectual
or artistic development only a shade removed from genius. In the case of
those in whom the awakening occurs all at once as the result of Yoga or
other spiritual practices, the sudden impact of powerful vital currents
on the brain and other organs is often attended with grave risk and
strange mental conditions, varying from moment to moment, exhibiting
in the beginning the abnormal peculiarities of a medium, mystic, genius,
and madman all rolled into one.

I had absolutely no knowledge of the technicalities of the science or the
mode of operation of the great energy or of the spheres of its activity,
as vast and as varied as humanity itself. I did not know that I had
dug down to the very roots of my being and that my whole life was at
stake. Like the vast majority of men interested in Yoga I had no idea
that a system designed to develop the latent possibilities and nobler
qualities in man could be fraught with such danger at times as to destroy
the sanity or crush life out ofone by the sheer weight ofentirely foreign
and uncontrollable conditions of the mind.

On the third day of the awakening I did not feel myself in a mood for
meditation and passed the time in bed, not a little uneasy about the
abnormal state of my mind and the exhausted condition of my body. The next
day when I sat for meditation, after a practically sleepless night, I found
to my consternation that I completely lacked the power to concentrate my
attention on any point for even a brief interval and that a thin stream of
the radiant essence, which had impinged on my brain with such vivifying
and elevating effect on the first two occasions, was now pouring into it
automatically with a sinister light that instead of uplifting had a most
depressing influence on me.

The days that followed had all the appearance of a prolonged nightmare. It
seemed as ifI had abruptly precipitated myself from the steady rock of
normality into a madly racing whirlpool of abnormal existence. The keen
desire to sit and meditate, which had always been present during the
preceding days, disappeared suddenly and was replaced by a feeling of
horror of the supernatural. I wanted to fly from even the thought ofit. At
the same time I felt a sudden distaste for work and conversation, with the
inevitable result that being left with nothing to keep myself engaged,
time hung heavily on me, adding to the already distraught condition of
my mind. The nights were even more terrible. I could not bear to have a
light in my room after I had retired to bed. The moment my head touched
the pillow a large tongue of flame sped across the spine into the interior
of my head. It appeared as if the stream of living light continuously
rushing through the spinal cord into the cranium gathered greater speed
and volume during the hours of darkness. Whenever I closed my eyes I found
myself looking into a weird circle oflight, in which luminous currents
swirled and eddied, moving rapidly from side to side. The spectacle was
fascinating but awful, invested with a supernatural awe which sometimes
chilled the very marrow in my bones.

Only a few days before it had been my habit, when in bed at night, to
invite sleep by pursuing a pleasant chain of thoughts which often led me,
without revealing the exact moment when it happened, from the waking state
into the fantastic realm ofdreams. Now everything was altered. I tossed
restlessly from side to side without being able for hours to bring my
agitated mind to the degree of composure needed to bring sleep. After
extinguishing the lights, instead of seeing myself in darkness wafted
gradually to a delicious state of rest preparatory to sleep, I found myself
staring fearfully into a vast internal glow, disquieting and threatening
at times, always in rapid motion as ifthe particles of an ethereal luminous
stuff crossed and recrossed each other, resembling the ceaseless movement
of wildly leaping lustrous clouds of spray rising from a waterfall which,
lighted by the sun, rushes down foaming into a seething pool.

Sometimes it seemed as ifa jet of molten copper, mounting up through
the spine, dashed against my crown and fell in a scintillating shower
of vast dimensions all around me. I gazed at it fascinated, with fear
gripping my heart. Occasionally it resembled a fireworks display of great
magnitude. As far as I could look inwardly with my mental eye, I saw only
a brilliant shower or a glowing pool oflight. I seemed to shrink in size
when compared to the gigantic halo that surrounded me, stretching out on
every side in undulating waves of copper colour distinctly perceptible in
the surrounding darkness, as if the optic centre in the brain was now in
direct contact with an extremely subtle, luminous substance in perpetual
motion, flooding the brain and nervous system, without the intervention
of the intermediary channels of the retina and the optic nerve.

I seemed to have touched accidentally the lever of an unknown mechanism,
hidden in the extremely intricate and yet unexplored nervous structure
in the body, releasing a hitherto held up torrent which, impinging upon
the auditory and optic regions, created the sensation of roaring sounds
and weirdly moving lights, introducing an entirely new and unexpected
feature in the normal working of the mind that gave to all my thoughts
and actions the semblance of unreality and abnormality. For a few days
I thought I was suffering from hallucinations, hoping that my condition
would become normal again after some time. But instead ofdisappearing or
even diminishing as the days went by, the abnormality became more and more
pronounced, assuming gradually the state of an obsession, which grew in
intensity as the luminous appearances became wilder and more fantastic
and the noises louder and more uncanny. The dreadful thought began to
take hold of my mind that I was irretrievably heading towards a disaster
from which I was powerless to save myself.

To one uninitiated in the esoteric science of Kundalini, as I was at
that time, all that transpired afterwards presented such an abnormal and
unnatural appearance that I became extremely nervous about the outcome. I
passed every minute of the time in a state of acute anxiety and tension,
at a loss to know what had happened to me and why my system was functioning
in such an entirely abnormal manner. I felt exhausted and spent. The day
after the experience I suffered loss of appetite, and food tasted like ash
in my mouth. My tongue was coated white, and there was a redness in the
eyes never noticed before. My face wore a haggard and anxious expression,
and there were acute disturbances in the digestive and excretory organs. I
lost my regularity and found myself at the mercy of a newly released force
about which I knew nothing, creating a tumultuous and agitated condition
of the mind as the sweep of a tempest creates an agitation in the placid
waters of a lake.

There was no remission in the current rising from the seat of Kundalini. I
could feel it leaping across the nerves in my back and even across those
lining the front part of my body from the loins upward. But most alarming
was the way in which my mind acted and behaved after the incident. I felt
as ifl were looking at the world from a higher elevation than that from
which I saw it before. It is very difficult to express my mental condition
accurately. All I can say is that it seemed as if my cognitive faculty
had undergone a transformation and that I had, as it were, mentally
expanded. What was more startling and terrifying was the fact that the
point of consciousness in me was not as invariable nor its condition as
stable as it had been before. It expanded and contracted, regulated in a
mysterious way by the radiant current that was flowing up from the lowest
plexus. This widening and narrowing were accompanied by a host of terrors
for me. At times I felt slightly elated with a transient morbid sense of
well-being and achievement, forgetting for the time being the abnormal
state I was in, but soon after was made acutely conscious of my critical
condition and again oppressed by a tormenting cloud of fear. The few brief
intervals of mental elation were followed by fits of depression much more
prolonged and so acute that I had to muster all my strength and will-power
to keep myself from succumbing completely to their influence. I sometimes
gagged my mouth to keep from crying and fled from the solitude of my room
to the crowded street to prevent myself from doing some desperate act.

For weeks I had no respite. Each morning heralded for me a new kind of
terror, a fresh complication in the already disordered system, a deeper
fit ofmelancholy or more irritable condition of the mind which I had to
restrain to prevent it from completely overwhelming me by keeping myself
alert, usually after a completely sleepless night; and after withstanding
patiently the tortures of the day, I had to prepare myselffo‘r the even
worse torment of the night. A man cheerfully overcomes insurmountable
difficulties and bravely faces overwhelming odds when he is confident of
his mental and physical condition. I completely lost confidence in my own
mind and body and lived like a haunted, terror-stricken stranger in my
own flesh, constantly reminded of my precarious state. My consciousness
was in such a state of unceasing flux that I was never certain how it
would behave within the next few minutes. It rose and fell like a wave,
raising me one moment out of the clutches of fear to dash me again the
next into the depths of despair. It seemed as ifthe stream of vitality
rising into my brain through the backbone connected mysteriously with
the region near the base of the spine was playing strange tricks with
my imagination. Also I was unable to stop it or to resist its effect on
my thoughts. Was I losing my mind? \Vere these the first indications of
mental disorder? This thought constantly drove me to desperation. It was
not so much the extremely weird nature of my mental condition as the fear
of incipient madness or some grave disorder of the nervous system which
filled me with growing dismay.

I lost all feeling of love for my wife and children. I had loved them
fondly from the depths of my being. The fountain of love in me seemed to
have dried up completely. It appeared as if a scorching blast had raced
through every pore in my body, wiping out every trace ofaflection. I
looked at my children again and again, trying to evoke the deep feeling
with which I had regarded them previously, but in vain. My love for them
seemed to be dead beyond recall. They appeared to me no better than
strangers. 'lb reawaken the emotion of love in my heart I fondled and
caressed them, talked to them in endearing terms, but never succeeded in
experiencing that spontaneity and warmth which are characteristic of true
attachment. I knew they were my flesh and blood and was conscious of the
duty I owed to them. My critical judgment was unimpaired, but love was
dead. The recollection of my departed mother, whom I always remembered
with deep affection, brought with it no wave of the deep emotion which
I had invariably felt at the thought of her. I viewed this unnatural
disappearance of a deep-rooted feeling with despondency, finding myself a
different man altogether and my unhappiness increased at seeing myself
robbed of that which gives life its greatest charm.

I studied my mental condition constantly with fear at my heart. When
I compared my new conscious personality with what it had been before,
I could definitely see a radical change. There had been an unmistakable
extension. The vital energy which lighted the flame of being was pouring
visibly inside my brain; this had not been the case before. The light,
too, was impure and variable. The flame was not burning with a pure,
imperceptible and steady lustre as in normal consciousness. It grew brighter
and fainter by turns. No doubt the illumination spread over a wider circle,
but it was not as clear and transparent as before. It seemed as ifI were
looking at the world through a haze. When I glanced at the sky I failed
to notice the lovely azure I used to see before. My eyesight had always
been good and even now there was nothing obviously wrong with it. I
could easily read the smallest type and clearly distinguish objects at
a distance. Obviously my vision was unimpaired, but there was something
wrong with the cognitive faculty. The recording instrument was still in
good order, but something was amiss with the observer.

In the normal man, the flow of the stream of consciousness is so nicely
regulated that he can notice no variation in it from boyhood to death. He
knows himself as a conscious entity, 3 nondimensional point of awareness
located more particularly in the head with a faint extension covering
the trunk and limbs. When he closes his eyes to study it attentively,
he ends by observing a conscious presence, himselfin fact, round the
region of the head. As I could easily discern even in that condition
of mental disquietude, this field of consciousness in me had vastly
increased. It was akin to that which I had experienced in the vision,
but divested of every trace ofhappiness which had characterized my first
experience. On the contrary, it was gloomy and fear-ridden, depressed
instead of cheerful, murky instead of clearly transparent. It seemed
as if prolonged concentration had opened a yet partially developed
centre in the brain which depended for its fuel on the stream of energy
constantly rushing upward from the reproductive region. The enlarged
conscious field was the creation of this hitherto closed chamber, which
was now functioning imperfectly, first because it had been forced open
prematurely, and secondly because I was utterly ignorant of the way to
adjust myself to the new development.

For weeks I wrestled with the mental gloom caused by my abnormal condition,
growing more despondent each day. My face became extremely pale and my body
thin and weak. I felt a distaste for food and found fear clutching my heart
the moment I swallowed anything. Often I left the plate untouched. Very
soon my whole intake of food amounted to a cup or two of milk and a few
oranges. Beyond that I could eat nothing. I knew I could not survive
for long on such an insufficient diet, but I could not help it. I was
burning inside but had no means to assuage the fire. While my intake
offood was drastically reduced, the daily expenditure of energy increased
tremendously. My restlessness had assumed such a state that I could
not sit quietly for even half an hour. When I did so, my attention was
drawn irresistibly towards the strange behaviour of my mind. Immediately
the ever-present sense of fear was intensified, and my heart thumped
violently. I had to divert my attention somehow to free myself from the
horror of my condition.

In order to prevent my mind from dwelling again and again on itself, I
took recourse to walking. On rising in the morning, as long as I possessed
the strength to do so, I left immediately for a slow walk to counteract
the effect of an oppressive sleepless night, when, forced to lie quiet
in the darkness, I had no alternative but to be an awed spectator of the
weird and fearsome display visible inside. On the way, I met scores of my
acquaintances taking their morning constitutional, laughing and talking as
they went. I could not share their enjoyment, and passed them in silence
with merely a nod or gesture of salutation. I had no interest in any person
or in any subject in the world. My own abnormality blotted out everything
else from my mind. During the day I walked in my room or in the compound,
diverting my attention from object to object without allowing it to rest
on one particular thing for any length of time. I counted my steps or
looked at the ceiling or at the wall, at the floor or at the surrounding
objects one by one, at each for but a fleeting instant, thus with all the
will-power at my command preventing my brain from attaining a state of
fixity at any time. I was fighting desperately against my own unruly mind.

But how long could my resistance last? How long could I save myself from
madness creeping upon me? My starving body was becoming weaker and weaker;
my legs tottered under me while I walked, and yet walk I had to ifI was
to rid myself of the clutching terror which gripped my heart as soon as
I allowed my mind to brood upon itself. My memory became weaker and I
faltered in my talk, while the anxious expression on my face deepened. At
the blackest moments, my eyebrows drew together into an anxious frown,
the thickly wrinkled forehead and a wild look in my gleaming eyes giving my
countenance a maniacal expression. Several times during the day I glanced
at myself in the looking-glass or felt my pulse, and to my horror found
myself deteriorating more and more. I do not know what sustained my will
so that even in a state ofextreme terror I could maintain control over
my actions and gestures. No one could even suspect what was happening to
me inside. I knew that but a thin line now separated me from lunacy, and
yet I gave no indication of my condition to anyone. I suffered unbearable
torture in silence, weeping internally at the sad turn of events, blaming
myself bitterly again and again for having delved into the supernatural
without first acquiring a fuller knowledge of the subject and providing
against the dangers and risks of the path.

Even at the times of greatest dejection, and even when almost at
the breaking point, something inside prevented me from consulting a
physician. There was no psychiatrist at Iammu in those days, and even
if there had been one, I am sure I should not have gone to see him. It
was well that I did not do so. The little knowledge ofdiseases that I
possessed was enough to tell me that my abnormality was unique, that
it was neither purely psychic nor purely physical, but the outcome of
an alteration in the nervous activity of my body, which no therapist
on earth could correctly diagnose or cure. On the other hand, a single
mistake in treatment in that highly dangerous condition, when the whole
system was in a state of complete disorder and not amenable to control,
might have proved fatal. Mistakes were inevitable in view of the entirely
obscure and unidentifiable nature of the disease.

A skilled physician bases his observations on the symptoms present in an
ailment, relying for the success of his treatment on the uniformity of
pathological conditions in the normal human body. Physiological processes
follow a certain specific rhythm which the body tries to maintain under all
ordinary circumstances. In my case, since the basic element responsible
for the rhythm and the uniformity was at the moment itselfin a state of
turmoil, the anarchy prevailing not only in the system but also in the
sphere of thought, nay in the innermost recesses of my being, can be better
imagined than described. I did not know then what I came to grasp later
on-that an automatic mechanism, forced by the practice of meditation, had
suddenly started to function with the object of reshaping my mind to make
it fit for the expression of a more heightened and extended consciousness,
by means of biological processes as natural and as governed by inviolable
laws as the evolution ofspecies or the development and birth of a child. But
to my great misfortune I did not know this at the time. To the best of my
knowledge, this mighty secret of nature is not known on earth today,
although there is ample evidence to show that certain methods to deal with
the condition, when brought about suddenly by the practice of Hatha Yoga,
were fully known to the ancient adepts.

I studied my condition thoroughly from day to day to assure myself that
what I experienced was real and not imaginary. Just as a man finding
himself in an unbelievable situation pinches himself to make certain that
he is not dreaming but awake, I invariably studied my bodily symptoms
to find corroboration for my mental condition. It would be a fallacy
to assume that I was the victim of a hallucination. Subsequent events
and my present condition absolutely rule out that possibility. No, the
crisis I was passing through was not a creation of my own imagination. It
had a real physiological basis and was interwoven with the whole organic
structure of my body. The entire machinery from the brain to the smallest
organ was deeply involved, and there was no escape for me from the storm
of nervous forces which blew through my system day and night, released
unexpectedly by my own effort.

 ...

During recent times there have hardly been any instances of individuals
in whom the serpent fire burnt ceaselessly from the day of awakening of
Kundalini to the last, bringing about mental transformations known to and
hinted at by the ancient sages of India. But that there have been many
cases of a sporadic type in which the shakti“ was active intermittently
admits of no doubt. The mystics and saints of all countries, who from an
early age are prone to transcendental visions and pass occasionally into
ecstatic trances, thereafter reverting to their normal consciousness, belong
to the latter category. The psychics and mediums and all those possessing
the power ofclairvoyance, mind reading, prediction, and similar supernormal
faculties owe their surprising gifts to the action of an awakened Kundalini,
operating in a limited way in the head without reaching the highest centre,
when it only overshadows the whole consciousness. The same is true of the
men of genius in whom the energy feeds certain specific regions of the
brain, stimulating them to extraordinary phases ofintellectual, literary,
or artistic activity.

In all the cases mentioned above, either the flow of the more potent
vital current is so regulated and circumscribed that it does not create
any disturbance in the system or, as in the case of mystics in whom the
impact of the current on the brain is very powerful at times, the condition
begins at birth so that the nervous system usually becomes accustomed to
it from infancy, when one is not aware of the variations in consciousness
nor able to place a meaning on the abnormal happenings in the body and
feel the sense of fear. But even so, the latter have often to face many
a crisis and to endure unusual suffering and torment before they acquire
a stable and peaceful condition of the mind and are in a position to
study and express comprehensively the experience which marks them as a
class apart from the normal run of mortals. The individuals belonging to
these categories, excepting mystics, do not perceive the luminosity and
the movement of nervous currents, except in exceptional cases, as the How
of the vital energy is too restricted to create weird effects. Moreover,
having been an integral part of the organism from birth, it becomes an
inherent trait of their personalities.

The popular books on Yoga that I had read years before contained no hint of
such an abnormal development and nerve-shattering experience. The learned
authors confined themselves to the description of various postures and
methods, all borrowed from the ancient writings on the subject. Few
of them claimed to have had the experience but were eager to teach to
others what they had never learned themselves. In some of the books there
was a passing reference to Kundalini Yoga. A couple of pages or a small
chapter was all that the authors thought sufficient for describing this
most difficult and least known form of Yoga. It was stated that Kundalini
represents the cosmic vital energy lying dormant in the human body which
is coiled round the base of the spine, a little below the sexual organ,
like a serpent, fast asleep and closing with her mouth the aperture of
the Sushumna, the hairlike duct rising through the spinal cord to the
conscious centre at the top of the head. When roused, Kundalini, they
said, rises through the Smhumna like a streak of lightning carrying with
her the vital energy of the body, which for the time being becomes cold
and lifeless, with complete or partial cessation of vital functions,
to join her divine spouse Shiva in the last or seventh centre in the
brain. In the course of this process, the embodied self, freed from the
bondage of flesh, passes into a condition of ecstasy known as Samadhi,
realizing itself as deathless, full of bliss, and one with the all-pervading
supreme consciousness. In only one or two writings were there vague hints
ofdangers to be met on the path. The nature of the danger and the methods
to prevent or overcome it were not explained by the authors.

From the vague ideas I had gathered from these works or picked up in
the course ofdiscussions or talks about Yoga, it was only natural for me
to infer that the abnormal condition I had brought upon myself was the
direct outcome of my meditation, The experience I was having corresponded
in every respect with the descriptions given of the ecstatic state by
those who had attained this condition themselves; there was therefore no
reason for me to doubt the validity or the possibility of my vision. There
could be no mistake about the sounds I had heard and the effulgence I
had perceived. Above all, there certainly could be no mistake about the
transformation of my own consciousness, the nearest and the most intimate
part of me, that I had experienced more than once, and the memory of which
was so strong that it could never be effaced or mistaken for any other
condition. It could not be a mere figment of my fancy because during the
vision I still possessed the capacity to make a comparison between the
extended state ofconsciousness and the normal one, and when it began
to fade, I could perceive the contraction that was taking place. It
was undoubtedly a real experience, and has been described with all the
power of expression at their command by mystics and saints all over the
world. But in my case there was one particular and unmistakable deviation
from the usual type of vision： the most extraordinary sensation at the
base of the spine followed by the How of a radiant current through the
spinal column into the head. This part of the strange experience tallied
with the phenomena associated with the awakening of Kundalini, and hence
I could not be mistaken in supposing that I had unknowingly aroused the
coiled serpent, and that the serious disturbance in my nervous system as
well as the extraordinary but most awful state I was in, was in some way
occasioned by it.

I made no mention of my condition to anyone save my brother-in-law, who
came to Jammu during those days on a short business visit. He was many
years older than I and loved me like a son. I talked to him unreservedly,
aware of his deep affection for me. He had himself practised meditation
for many years under the guidance of a preceptor who claimed knowledge
of Kundalini Yoga. Frank and noble by nature, he often narrated to me
his own experiences in the simple manner of a child, seeking corroboration
from me for the results he had achieved by his labours. Without the least
pretension to knowledge, he gave me every bit of information he possessed,
and thus in a way was instrumental in saving my life. My wife knew nothing
of the life and death struggle in which I was engaged, but alarmed by my
strange behaviour, lack of appetite, bodily disturbances, constant walks,
and above all by the never-lifting cloud of anxiety and gloom on my face,
she advised me again and again to consult a physician and constantly
watched over me day and night, frantic with anxiety.

My brother-in-law could not grasp the significance of what I related to
him, but said that his guru had once remarked that if by mistake Kundalini
were aroused through any other nudi (nerve) except Sushumna, there was
every danger of serious psychic and physical disturbances, ending in
permanent disability, insanity, or death. This was particularly the ease,
the teacher had said, if the awakening occurred through pingala on the
right side of the spine when the unfortunate man is literally burned to
death due to excessive internal heat, which cannot be controlled by any
external means. I was horrified by this statement and in desperation went
to consult a learned ascetic from Kashmir who had come to spend the winter
at Iammu. He heard me with patience and said that the experience I had
undergone could not at all be due to the awakening ol'the serpent power,
as that was always blissl‘ul and could not he associated with any agency
liable to cause disease or disturbance. He made another gruesome suggestion,
heard from his teacher or picked up from some ancient work, to the effect
that my malady was probably due to the venom ofmalignant spirits that
beset the path of Yogis, and prescribed a decoction, which I never took.

On the suggestion of someone I glanced through a couple of books on
Kundalini Yoga, translations in English of ancient Sanskrit texts. I could
not read even a page attentively, the attempt involving fixity of attention
which I was incapable of maintaining for any length of time. The least
effort instantly aggravated tny condition by increasing the How of, the
newborn energy into the brain, which added to my terror and misery. I just
glanced through the books, reading a line here and a paragraph there. The
description of the symptoms that followed the awakening corroborated my
own experience and firmly strengthened my conviction that I had roused
the vital force dormant in me; but whether the agony of mind and body
that I was passing through was an inevitable result of the awakening or
whether I had drawn up the energy through a wrong nerve, I could not be
sure. There was, however, one very briefly stated injunction -- call it
accident or divine guidance -- I picked up from the huge mass of material
in that very cursory glance. It was to the effect that during the course
of the practice the student is not permitted to keep his stomach empty,
but should take a light meal every three hours. This brief advice, Hashing
across my brain at a most critical moment when I hovered between life
and death and had lost every hope of survival, saved my life and sanity
and continues to do so to this day.

At the time I paid no attention to this significant hint which, based
on the experience olicountless men, many of whom had probably lost their
lives in the attempt to arouse the serpent, had come down through the
ages as guidance for the initiates, liven if] had tried my hardest to do
so, I could not have acted upon the advice at that time, as food was so
abhorrent to tne that my stomach revolted at the mere thought of it. I was
burning in every part of my body while my mind, like a floating balloon,
bobbed up and down and swayed sideways erratically, unable to keep itself
steady even for a moment.

Whenever my mind turned upon itselfI always found myself staring with
growing panic into the unearthly radiance that filled my head, swirling and
eddying like a fearsome whirlpool; even found its reflection in the pitch
darkness of my room during the slowly dragging hours of the night. Not
infrequently it assumed horrible shapes and postures, as ifsatanic faces
were grinning and inhuman forms gesticulating at me in the blackness. This
happened night after night for months, weakening my will and sapping my
resistance until I felt unable to endure the fearful ordeal any longer,
certain that at any moment I might succumb to the relentlessly pursuing
horror and, bidding farewell to my life and sanity, rush out of the room
a raving maniac. But I persisted, determined to hold on as long as I had a
vestige of willpower, resolved at the first sign of breaking to surrender
my life rather than lose myself in the ghastly wilderness of insanity.

When it was day I longed for the night and during the night I fervently
prayed for the day. As the time wore on, my hope dwindled and desperation
seized me. There was no relaxation in the tension or any abatement in the
ceaselessly haunting fear or any relief from the fiery stream that darted
through my nerves and poured into my agonized brain. On the other hand,
as my vitality ebbed as a result of fasts, and my resistance weakened, the
malady was aggravated to such a pitch that every moment I expected the end.

It was in such a frame of mind that the holy festival of Shivratri or
the night ofShiva, came to pass towards the end of February. As usual
every year my wife had prepared painstakingly some dainty dishes on the
day and gently insisted that I, too, should partake of the food. Not to
disappoint her and cast a cloud ofgloom on her already anxiety-filled
mind, I acquiesced and forcibly swallowed a few morsels, then gave up and
washed my hands. Immediately I felt a sinking sensation at the pit of my
stomach, a fiery stream of energy shot into my head, and I felt myself
lifted up and up, expanding awfully with unbearable terror clutching at
me from every side. I felt a reeling sensation while my hands and feet
grew cold as ice, as if all the heat had escaped from them to feed the
fiery vapour in the head which had risen through the cord like the ruddy
blast from a furnace and now, acting like a poison on the brain, struck
me numb. I was overpowered by faintness and giddiness.

I staggered to my feet and dragged myself heavily towards my bed in the
adjacent room. With trembling hands I lifted up the cover and slipped in,
trying to stretch myself into a position of ease. But I was in a terrible
condition, burning internally from head to toes, outwardly cold as ice, and
shivering as if stricken with ague. I felt my pulse; it was racing madly
and my heart was thumping wildly below my ribs, its pounding distinctly
audible to me. But what horrified me was the intensity of the fiery
currents that now darted through my body, penetrating into every part and
every organ. My brain worked desperately, unable to give coherence to my
frenzied thoughts. To call in a doctor for consultation in such an unheard
of disease would be a mere waste of effort. His first thought on hearing of
my symptoms would be to turn to a lunatic .‘isylum. It would be futile on
my part to seek help from any other quarter for such an affliction. What
could I do then to save myself from this torture? Could it be that in my
previous semi-starved condition, sulnsisting only on a few oranges and a
little milk, the fiery current could not attain such awful intensity as it
had done now with the entry of solid food in my stomach? How could I save
myself? Where could I go to escape from the furnace raging in my interior?

The heat grew every moment, causing such unbearable pain that I writhed
and twisted from side to side while streams of cold perspiration poured
down my face and limbs. But still the heat increased and soon it seemed as
if innumerable red-hot pins were coursing through my body, scorching and
blistering the organs and tissues like flying sparks. Suffering the most
excruciating torture, I clenched my hands and bit my lips to stop myself
from leaping out of bed and crying at the top of my voice. The throbbing
of my heart grew more and more terrific, acquiring such a spasmodic
violence that I thought it must either stop beating or burst. Flesh and
blood could not stand such strain without giving way any moment. It was
easy to see that the body was valiantly trying to fight the virulent
poison speeding across the nerves and pouring into the brain. But the
fight was so unequal and the fury let loose in my system so lethal that
there could be not the least doubt about the outcome. There were dreadful
disturbances in all the organs, each so alarming and painful that I wonder
how I managed to retain my selfpossession under the onslaught. The whole
delicate organism was burning, withering away completely under the fiery
blast racing through its interior.

I knew I was dying and that my heart could not stand the tremendous strain
for long. My throat was scorched and every part of my body flaming and
burning, but I could do nothing to alleviate the dreadful suffering. Ifa
well or river had been near I would have jumped into its cold depths,
preferring death to what I was undergoing. But there was no well and
the river was halfa mile away. With a great effort I got up, trembling,
with the idea of pouring a few buckets of cold water over my head to abate
the dreadful heat. But at that moment my eyes fell on my small daughter,
Ragina, lying in the next bed awake, watching my feverish movements with
Wide-open anxious eyes. With the remnant of sense still left in me I could
understand that the least unusual movement on my part at that time would
make her cry and that ifI started to pour water over my body at such an
unearthly hour, both she and her mother, who was busy in the kitchen,
would almost die with fright. The thought restrained me and I decided to
bear the internal agony until the end, which could not be far off.

What had happened to me all of a sudden? What devilish power of the
underworld held me in its relentless grasp? Was I doomed to die in this
dreadful way, leaving a corpse with blackened face and limbs to make people
wonder what unheard-of horror had overtaken me as a punishment for crimes
committed in a previous birth? I racked my distracted brain for a way of
escape, only to meet blank despair on every side. The effort exhausted
me and I felt myself sinking, dully conscious of the scalding sea of pain
in which I was drowning. I tried desperately to rouse myself, only to
sink back again, deadened by a torment beyond my power to endure. After a
while with a sudden, inexplicable revival of strength, marking the onset
of delirium, I came back to life with a shred of sanity left, Almighty
alone knows how, just sufficient to prevent me from giving way completely
to acts of madness and self-violence.

Pulling the cover over my face, I stretched myself to my full length
on the bed, burning in every fibre, lashed as it were by a fiery rain
of red-hot needles piercing my skin. At this moment a fearful idea
struck me. Could it be that I had aroused Kundalini through pingala
or the solar nerve which regulates the flow of heat in the body and is
located on the right side of Sushumna? If so, I was doomed, I thought
desperately and as ifby divine dispensation the idea flashed across my
brain to make a last-minute attempt to rouse Ida, or the lunar nerve on
the left side, to activity, thus neutralizing the dreadful burning effect
of the devouring fire within. With my mind reeling and senses deadened
with pain, but with all the will-power left at my command, I brought my
attention to bear on the left side of the seat of Kundalini, and tried to
force an imaginary cold current upward through the middle of the spinal
cord. In that extraordinarily extended, agonized, and exhausted state of
consciousness, I distinctly felt the location of the nerve and strained
hard mentally to divert its flow into the central channel. Then, as if
waiting for the destined moment, a miracle happened.

There was a sound like a nerve thread snapping and instantaneously a
silvery streak passed zigzag through the spinal cord, exactly like the
sinuous movement of a white serpent in rapid flight, pouring an effulgent,
cascading shower of brilliant vital energy into my brain, filling my head
with a blissful lustre in place of the flame that had been tormenting
me for the last three hours. Completely taken by surprise at this sudden
transformation of the fiery current, darting across the, entire network
of my nerves only a moment before, and overjoyed at the cessation of pain,
I remained absolutely quiet and motionless for some time, tasting the
bliss of relief with a mind flooded with emotion, unable to believe I
was really free of the horror. Tortured and exhausted almost to the point
of collapse by the agony I had suffered during the terrible interval,
I immediately fell asleep, bathed in light and for the first time after
weeks of anguish felt the sweet embrace of restful sleep.

As if rudely shaken out of my slumber I awoke after about an hour. The
stream of lustre was still pouring in my head, my brain was clear,
my heart and pulse had stopped racing, the burning sensations and the
fear had almost vanished; but my throat was still dry, my mouth parched,
and I found myself in a state of extreme exhaustion, as if every ounce
of energy had been drained out of me. Exactly at that moment another
idea occurred to me; as ifsuggested by an invisible intelligence, and
with irresistible power came the direction that I should eat something
immediately. I motioned to my wife, who as usual was lying awake in her
bed anxiously watching my every movement, to fetch me a cup of milk and
a little bread. Taken aback by this unusual and untimely request, she
hesitated a moment, and then complied without a word. I ate the bread,
swallowing it with difficulty with the help of the milk and immediately
fell asleep again.

I woke up again after about two hours, considerably refreshed by the
sleep. My head was still filled with the glowing radiance and, to my
surprise, in this heightened and lustrous state of consciousness I could
distinctly perceive a tongue of the golden flame searching my stomach
for food and moving round along the nerves lining it. I took a few bites
of bread and another cup of milk, and as soon as I had done so I found
the halo in the head contracting and a larger tongue of flame licking
my stomach, as ifa part of the streaming energy pouring into my brain
was being diverted to the gastric region to expedite the process of
digestion. I lay awake, dumb with wonder, watching this living radiance
moving from place to place through the whole digestive tract, caressing
the intestines and the liver, while another stream poured into the kidneys
and the heart. I pinched myself to make sure whether I was dreaming or
asleep, absolutely dumbfounded by what I was witnessing in my own body,
entirely powerless to regulate or to guide the current. Unlike the horror
I had experienced before, I felt no discomfort now; all that I could feel
was a gentle and soothing warmth moving through my body as the current
travelled from point to point. I watched this wonderful play silently,
my whole being filled with boundless gratitude to the Unseen for this
timely deliverance from a dreadful fate; and a new assurance began to
shape itself in my mind that the serpent fire was in reality now at work
in my exhausted and agonized body; and that I was safe.
