---
By: Jalal al-Din Rumi
---
Both light and shadow are the dance of Love.
Love has no cause, it is the astrolabe of God's secrets.
Lover and loving are inseparable and timeless.
Although I may try to describe love,
when I experience it, I am speechless.
Although I may try to write about love, I am rendered helpless.
My pen breaks, and the paper slips away
at the ineffable place where lover loving and loved are one.
Every moment is made glorious by the light of Love.

A lover asked his beloved,
Do you love yourself more than you love me?
Beloved replied, I have died to myself and I live for you.
I've disappeared from myself and my attributes,
I am present only for you.
I've forgotten all my learnings,
but from knowing you I've become a scholar.
I've lost all my strength, but from your power I am able.
I love myself...I love you.
I love you...I love myself.

I am so small I can barely be seen.
How can this great love be inside me?
Look at your eyes, they are small but they
see enormous things.

You were born with potential
You were born with goodness and trust
You were born with ideals and dreams
You were born with greatness
You were born with wings
You are not meant for crawling, so don't
You have wings
Learn to use them and fly!

Oh lovers, where are you going?  Who are you looking for?
Your beloved is right here.  She lives in your own neighborhood.
Her face is veiled.  She hides behind screens calling for you,
while you search and lose yourself in the wilderness and the desert.
Cease looking for flowers, there blooms a garden in your own home.
While you go looking for trinkets, your treasure house awaits you
in your own being.  There is no need for suffering, God is here!

We are the mirror as well as the face in it.
We are tasting the taste this minute of eternity.
We are pain and what cures pain both.
We are the sweet cold water and the jar that pours.
I want to hold you close like a lute so we can cry out with loving.
You would rather throw stones at a mirror?
I am your mirror, and here are the stones.

You bewilder us with your grace,
all evils transformed into goodness.
You are the master alchemist.
You light the fire of love in Earth and Sky,
in heart and soul of every being.
Through your loving,
existence and non-existence merge.
All opposites unite.
All that is profane becomes sacred again.

Is it your face that adorns this garden?
Is it your fragrance that intoxicates this garden?
Is it your Spirit that has made this brook a river of wine?
Hundreds have looked for you, and died searching in this garden,
where you hide behind the scenes.
But this pain is not for those who come as lovers.
You are easy to find here.
You are in the breeze and in this river of wine.

In love...nothing is eternal, but drinking your wine.
There is no reason for bringing my life to you,
other than losing it.  I said, I just want to know you,
and then disappear.  She said, knowing me does not mean dying.

Gamble everything for love.
If you are a true human being.
If not, leave this gathering.
Half-heartedness doesn't reach into majesty.
You set out to find God, but then you keep
stopping for long periods at mean-spirited roadhouses.
Don't wait any longer.  Dive in the ocean, leave and let the
sea be you.  Silent, absent, walking an empty road, all praise.

My heart is burning with love. All can see this flame.
My heart is pulsing with passion, like waves on an ocean.
My friends have become strangers and I'm surrounded by enemies.
But I'm free as the wind, no longer hurt by those who approach me.
I'm at home, wherever I am.  And in the room of lovers I can see
  with closed eyes
the beauty that dances.  Behind the veils intoxicated with love,
  I too dance the rhythm
of this moving world.  I have lost my senses in this world of lovers.

Look at me and hear me,
because I am here...
just for that!

I am your moon and your moonlight too
I am your flower garden and your water too.
I have come all this way eager for you,
without shoes or shawl.
I want you to laugh, to kill all your worries, to love you, to nourish you.
Oh sweet bitterness, I will soothe you and heal you.
I will bring you roses.  I too have been covered with thorns.

This is how I would die into the love I have for you：
As pieces of cloud dissolve in  Sunlight.

A lover knows only humility, he has no choice.
He steals into your alley at night, he has no choice.
He longs to kiss every lock of your hair, don't fret, he has no choice.
In his frenzied love for you, he longs to break the chains of
his imprisonment, he has no choice.

The sky was lit by the splendor of the moon,
so powerful I fell to the ground.
Your love has made me sure
I am ready to forsake this worldly life
and surrender to the magnificence of your being.

I am your lover, come to my side, I will open the gate to your love.
Come settle with me, let us be neighbors to the stars.
You have been hiding so long, endlessly drifting in the sea of my love.
Even so, you have always been connected to me.
Concealed, revealed, in the unknown, in the un-manifest.
I am life itself.  You have been a prisoner of a little pond,
I am the ocean and its turbulent flood.  Come merge with me,
leave this world of ignorance.  Be with me, I will open the gate to your love.

You come to us from another world,
from beyond the stars and the void of space.
Transcendent, pure, of unimaginable beauty.
Bringing with you the essence of love.
You transform all who are touched by you.
Mundane concerns, troubles and sorrows dissolve in your presence,
bringing joy to ruler and ruled, to peasant and King.

You arouse me with your touch, although I can't see your hands.
You have kissed me with tenderness, although I haven't seen your lips.
You are hidden from me, but it is you who keeps me alive.
Perhaps the time will come, when you will tire of kisses,
I shall be happy even from insults from you.
I only ask that you keep some attention on me.

Because the idol is your face,
I have become an idolater.
Because the wine is from your cup,
I've become a drunkard.
In the existence of your love,
I have become non-existent.
This non-existence, linked to you,
is better than all existence.

I do not exist, am not an entity in this world or the next,
did not descend from Adam and Eve or any origin story.
My place is the placeless, a trace of the traceless.  Neither body or soul.
I belong to the beloved, have seen the two worlds as one
and that one call to and know, first, last, outer, inner,
only that breath breathing human being.

The moon has become a dancer at this festival of love.
This dance of light, this sacred blessing, this divine love
beckons us to a world beyond, that only lovers can see with their
eyes of fiery passion.  They are the chosen ones who have surrendered.
Once they were particles of light, now they are the radiant sun.
They have left behind the world of defeat-full games.
They are the privileged lovers who created new worlds
with their eyes of fiery passion.

I am bewildered by the magnificence of your beauty,
and wish to see you with a hundred eyes....
I am in the house of mercy,
and my heart is a place of prayer.
