---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 32-37
  Source:
    Title: The Essential Alan Watts
By: Alan Watts
Title: The Drama of It AllA
Format: mixed
---
Suppose you’re God. Suppose you have all time, eternity, and all power
at your disposal. What would you do? I believe you would say to yourself
after a while, “Man, get lost.” It‘s like asking another question
which amounts to supposing you were given the power to dream any dream you
wanted to dream every night. Naturally, you could dream any span of time --
you could dream seventy-five years of time in one night, a hundred years of
time in one night, a thousand years of time in one night -- and it could
be anything you wanted -- because you make up your mind before you go to
sleep. “Tonight I’m going to dream of so-and-so.” Naturally, you would
start out by fulfilling all your wishes. You would have all the pleasures you
could imagine, the most marvelous meals, the most entrancing love affairs,
the most romantic journeys; you could listen to music such as no mortal has
heard, and see landscapes beyond your wildest dreams.

And for several nights, oh, maybe for a whole month of nights, you would go
on that way, having a wonderful time. But then, after a while, you would
begin to think, “Well, I’ve seen quite a bit, let’s spice it up,
let’s have a little adventure.” And you would dream of yourself being
threatened by all sorts of dangers. You would rescue princesses from dragons,
you would perhaps engage in notable battles, you would be a hero. And then as
time went on, you would dare yourself to do more and more outrageous things,
and at some point in the game you would say, “Tonight I am going to dream
in such a way that I don’t know that I’m dreaming,” and by so doing
you would take the experience of the drama for complete reality. What a
shock when you woke up! You could really scare yourself!

And then on successive nights you might dare yourself to experience even more
extraordinary things just for the contrast when you woke up. You could, for
example, dream yourself in situations of extreme poverty, disease, agony. You
could, as it were, live the essence ofsuffering to its most intense point,
and then, suddenly, wake up and find it was after all nothing but a dream
and everything’s perfectly OK.

Well, how do you know that’s not what you're doing already. You, reading,
sitting there with all your problems, with all your whole complicated life
situations, it may just be the very dream you decided to get into. If you
don’t like it, what fun it’ll be when you wake up!

This is the essence of drama. In drama, all the people who see it know it’s
only a play. The proscenium arch, the cinema screen tells us, “Well, this
is an illusion, it is not for real.” In other words, they are going to act
their parts so convincingly that they’re going to have us sitting on the
edge of our seats in anxiety, they’re going to make us laugh, they're going
to make us cry, they’re going to make us feel horror. And all the time,
in the back of our minds we have what Germans call hintergedanken, which is
a thought way, way, way in the back of our minds, that we’re hardly aware
of but really know all the time. In the theater, we have a hintergedanken
that it’s only a play. But the mastery of the actors is going to almost
convince us that it's real.

And, so, imagine a situation in which you have the best of all possible
actors, namely God, and the best of all possible audiences ready to be taken
in and convinced that it’s real, namely God, and that you are all many,
many masks which the basic consciousness, the basic mind of the universe,
is assuming. To use a verse from G. K. Chesterton：

  But now a great thing in the street
  Seems any human nod
  Where shift in strange democracy
  The million masks of God.

It is like the mask of Vishnu, the preserver of the universe, a multiple
mask which illustrates the fact that the one who looks out ofmy eyes and out
of everyone’s eyes is the same center. So, when I look at another human
being, and I look straight into their eyes, I don’t like doing that,
there’s something embarrassing about looking into someone’s eyes too
closely. Don’t look at me that closely because I might give myselfaway! You
might find out who I really am! And what do you suppose that would be? Do
you suppose that another person who looks deeply into your eyes will read
all the things you’re ashamed of, all your faults, all the things you are
guilty of? Or is there some deeper secret than that?

The eyes are our most sensitive organ, and when you look and look and look
into another person’s eyes you are looking at the most beautiful jewels in
the universe. And if you look down beyond that surface beauty, it’s the
most beautiful jewel in the universe, because that's the universe looking
at you. We are the eyes of the cosmos. So that in a way, when you look
deeply into somebody’s eyes, you're looking deep into yourself, and the
other person is looking deeply into the same self, which many-eyed, as the
mask ofVishnu is many-faced, is looking out everywhere, one energy playing
myriads of different parts. Why?

It's perfectly obvious, because if you were God, and you knew every, thing and
were in control of everything, you would be bored to death. It would be like
making love to a plastic woman. Everything would be completely predictable,
completely known, completely clear, no mystery, no surprise whatever.

Look at it another way. The object of our technology is to control the world,
to have a superelectronic pushbutton universe, where we can get anything we
want, fulfill any desires simply by pushing a button. You're Aladdin with
the lamp, you rub it, the jinni comes and says, “Salaam, I'm your humble
servant, what do you wish." Anything you want.“

And after a while, just as in those dreams I described, you would decide one
day to forget that you were dreaming, you would say to the jinni of the lamp,
“I would like a surprise." Or God, in the Court of Heaven, might turn to
his vizier and say, “Oh, Commander of the Faithful, we are bored.” And
the vizier of the Court would reply, “Oh King, live forever, surely out of
the infinitude of your wisdom you can discover some way of not being bored."
And the King would reply, “Oh vizier, give us a surprise.“ That’s the
whole basis of the story of the Arabian Nights. Here was a very powerful
sultan who was bored. And therefore he challenged Scheherazade to tell him
a new story every night so that the telling of the tales, getting involved
in adventures, would never, never end.

Isn’t that the reason why we go to the theater, why we go to the movies,
because we want to get out of ourselves? We want a surprise; and a surprise
means that you have to other yourself. That is to say, there has to enter
into your experience some element that is not under your control.

So if our technology were to succeed completely, and everything were to
be under our control, we should eventually say, “We need a new button."
With all these control buttons, we always have to have a button labeled
SURPRISE, and just so it doesn’t become too dangerous, we’ll put a time
limit on it -- surprise for 15 minutes, for an hour, for a day, for a month,
a year, a lifetime. Then, in the end, when the surprise circuit is finished,
we’ll be back in control and we’ll all know where we are. And we'll
heave a sigh of relief, but, after a while, we’ll press the button labeled
SURPRISE once more.

You will notice a curious rhythm to what I have been explaining, and this
rhythm corresponds to the Hindu idea of the course of time and the way
evolution works, an idea drastically different from ours. First of all,
Hindus think oftime as circular, as going round -- look at your watch,
it goes round. But Westerners tend to think of time in a straight line,
a one-way street, and we got that idea from Hebrew religion, and from
St. Augustine. There is a time ofcreation, then a course of history which
leads up to final, eschatological catastrophe, the end of the world,
and after that, the judgment, in which all things will be put to right,
all questions answered, and justice dealt out to everyone according to his
merits. And that“ be that! Thereafter the universe will be, in a way,
static; there will be the eternally saved and the eternally damned.

Now, many people may not believe that today, but that has been a dominating
belief throughout the course of Western history, and it has had a tremendously
powerful influence on our culture. But the Hindus think half of the world as
going round and round for always, in a rhythm. They calculate the rounds
in periods that in Sanskrit are called lea/pas, and each ka/pa lasts for
4,320,000 years. And so a kalpa is the period or manvantam during which the
world as we know it is manifested. And it is followed by a period, also a
ka/pa long, 4,320,000 years, which is called pralaya, and this means when
the world is not manifested anymore.

And these are the days and nights of Brahma, the godhead. During the manuantam,
when the world is manifested, Brahma is asleep, dreaming that he is all
of us and everything that's going on, and during the pralaya, which is his
day, he‘s awake, and knows himself, or itself (because it's beyond sex),
for who and what he/she/it is. And then, once again, presses the button --
surprise! As in the course of our dreaming, we would very naturally dream
the most pleasant and rapturous dreams first and then get more adventurous,
and experience and explore the more venturesome dimensions of experience,
in the same way, the Hindus think of a kalpa of the manifested universe
manvantam as divided into four periods. These four periods are of different
lengths. The first is the longest, and the last is the shortest. They are
named in accordance with the throws in the Hindu game ofdice. There are four
throws and the throw of four is always the best throw, like the six in our
game, the throw of one, the worst throw.

Now, therefore, the first throw is called krz'ta and the epoch, the long,
long period for which this throw lasts, is called a yuga. So we will translate
yuga as an “epoch,” and we will translate kalpa as an "eon." Now the word
krita means “done,” as when we say, “well done,” and that is a period
of the world’s existence that we call the Golden Age when everything is
perfect, done to perfection. When it comes to an end, we get treta-yuga that
means “the throw of three," and in this period of manifestation there's an
element of the uncertain, an element ofinsecurity, an element of adventure
in things; It's like a three-legged stool is not as secure as a four-legged
one -- you‘re a little more liable to be thrown off balance.

That lasts for a very long time, too, but then we get next what is called
dvapara-yuga. In this period, the good and the bad, the pleasurable and the
painful, are equally balanced. But, finally, there comes kali-yuga. Kali
means “the worst throw,” and this lasts for the shortest time. This is
the period of manifestation in which the unpleasurable, painful, diabolical
principle finally takes over -- but it has the shortest innings.

And at the end of the kali-yuga, the great destroyer of the worlds,
God manifested as the destructive principle Shiva does a dance called the
tandava, and he appears, blue-bodied with ten arms, with lightning and fire
appearing from every pore in his skin, and does a dance in which the universe
is finally destroyed. The moment ofcosmic death is the waking up of Brahma,
the creator, for as Shiva turns round and walks off the stage, seen from
behind, he is Brahma, the creator, the beginning ofit all again. And Vishnu
is the preserver, that is to say, the going on ofit all, the whole state
of the godhead being manifested as many, many faces. 80, you see, this is
a philosophy of the role of evil in life which is rational and merciful.

If we think God is playing with the world, has created it for his plea --
sure, and has created all these other beings and they go through the most
horrible torments-terminal cancer, children being burned with napalm,
concentration camps, the Inquisition, the horrors that human beings go
through -- how is that possibly justifiable? We try by saying, “Well,
some God must have created it; ifa God didn’t create it, there’s nobody
in charge and there’s no rationality to the whole thing. It’s just a
tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury signifying nothing. It’s a
ridiculous system and the only out is suicide.”

But suppose it’s the kind of thing I’ve described to you, supposing it
isn’t that God is pleasing himself with all these victims, showing off
his justice by either rewarding them or punishing them -- supposing it’s
quite different from that. Suppose that God is the one playing all the parts,
that God is the child being burned to death with napalm. There is no victim
except the victor. All the different roles which are being experienced,
all the different feelings which are being felt, are being felt by the one
who originally desires, decides, wills to go into that very situation.

Curiously enough, there is something parallel to this in Christianity.
There’s a passage in St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philippians in which he
says a very curious thing： “Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, did not think identity with God
a thing to be clung to, but humbled himselfand made himself of no reputation,
and was found in fashion as a man and became obedient to death, even the death
of the cross." Here you have exactly the same idea, the idea of God becoming
human, suffering all that human beings can suffer, even death. And St. Paul
is saying, “Let this mind be in you," that is to say, let the same kind of
consciousness be in you that was in Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ knew he was God.

Wake up and find out eventually who you really are. In our culture, of
course, they’ll say you’re crazy or you’re blasphemous, and they’ll
either put you in jail or in the nut house (which is the same thing). But
ifyou wake up in India and tell your friends and relations, “My goodness,
I’ve just discovered that I’m God,” they’ll laugh and say, “Oh,
congratulations, at last you found out.”
