---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LXIX
    Page: 112
Title: How that a man’s affection is marvelously changed in ghostly feeling
  of this nought, when it is nowhere wrought
---
Wonderfully is a man’s affection varied in ghostly feeling of this nought
when it is nowhere wrought. For at the first time that a soul looketh
thereupon, it shall find all the special deeds of sin that ever he did since
he was born, bodily or ghostly, privily or darkly painted thereupon. And
howsoever that he turneth it about, evermore they will appear before his
eyes; until the time be, that with much hard travail, many sore sighings,
and many bitter weepings, he have in great part washed them away. Sometime
in this travail him think that it is to look thereupon as on hell; for him
think that he despaireth to win to perfection of ghostly rest out of that
pain. Thus far inwards come many, but for greatness of pain that they feel
and for lacking of comfort, they go back in beholding of bodily things：
seeking fleshly comforts without, for lacking of ghostly they have not yet
deserved, as they should if they had abided.

For he that abideth feeleth sometime some comfort, and hath some hope of
perfection; for he feeleth and seeth that many of his fordone special sins be
in great part by help of grace rubbed away. Nevertheless yet ever among he
feeleth pain, but he thinketh that it shall have an end, for it waxeth ever
less and less. And therefore he calleth it nought else but purgatory. Sometime
he can find no special sin written thereupon, but yet him think that sin
is a lump, he wot never what, none other thing than himself; and then it
may be called the base and the pain of the original sin. Sometime him think
that it is paradise or heaven, for diverse wonderful sweetness and comforts,
joys and blessed virtues that he findeth therein. Sometime him think it God,
for peace and rest that he findeth therein.

Yea! think what he think will; for evermore he shall find it a cloud of
unknowing, that is betwixt him and his God.
