---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Loss, Loneliness, and Grief
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 351
  Source:
    Title: A Grief Observed
By: C. S. Lewis
---
It’s not true that I'm always thinking of H. Work and conversation make
that impossible. But the times when I‘m not are perhaps my worst. For then,
though I have forgotten the reason, there is spread over everything a vague
sense of wrongness, of something amiss. Like in those dreams where nothing
terrible occurs -- nothing that would sound even remarkable ifyou told it
at breakfast-time -- but the atmosphere, the taste, of the whole thing
is deadly. So with this. I see the rowan berries reddening and don’t
know for a moment why they, ofall things, should be depressing. I hear
a clock strike and some quality it always had before has gone out of the
sound. What’s wrong with the world to make it so flat, shabby, worn-out
looking? Then I remember.

This is one of the things I’m afraid of. The agonies, the mad midnight
moments, must, in the course of nature, die away. But what will follow? Just
this apathy, this dead flatness? Will there come a time when I no longer
ask why the world is like a mean street, because I shall take the squalour
as normal? Does grief finally subside into boredom tinged by faint nausea?

Feelings, and feelings, and feelings. Let me try thinking instead. From
the rational point of‘view, what new factor has H’s death introduced
into the problem ofthe universe? What grounds has it given me for doubting
all that I believe? I knew already that these things, and worse, happened
daily. I would have said that I had taken them into account. I had
been warned-I had warned myself-not to reckon on worldly happiness. We
were even promised sufferings. They were part ofthe programme. We were
even told “Blessed are they that mourn" and I accepted it. I’ve
got nothing that I hadn’t bargained for. Ofcourse it is different
when the thing happens to oneself, not to others, and in reality, not
in imagination. Yes; but should it, for a sane man, make quite such a
difference as this? No. And it wouldn’t for a man whose faith had been
real faith and whose concern for other people’s sorrows had been real
concern. The case is too plain. Ifmy house has collapsed at one blow,
that is because it was a house of cards. The faith which “took these
things into account” was not faith but imagination. The taking them into
account was not real sympathy. If] had really cared, as I thought I did,
about the sorrows of the world, I should not have been so overwhelmed
when my own sorrow came. It has been an imaginary ta‘ith playing with
innocuous counters ld’bt’llc‘d “Illness.” " Pain," " Death"
and " Loneliness." I thought I trusted the rope until it mattered to me
whether it would bear me. Now it matters, and I find I didn't.

Bridge-players tell me that there must be some money on the game “or else,
people won’t take it seriously." Apparently it’s like that. Your bid --
tor God or no God, for a good God or the Cosmic Sadist, for eternal life
or nonentity -- will not be serious if nothing much is staked on it. And
you will never discover how serious it was until the stakes are raised
horribly high; until you find that you are playing not for counters or
for sixpences but for every penny you have in the world. Nothing less
will shake a man-or at any rate a man like me -- out ofhis merely verbal
thinking and his merely notional beliefs. He has to be knocked silly before
he comes to his senses. Only torture will bring out the truth. Only under
torture does he discover it himself.
