---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "6 - ䷅  - Sung"
    Line: 3
    Page: 47-48
By: Galileo Galilei
---
JUDGE. Let him say what seems fitting to him.

GALILEO. When I had reflected for several days attentively and continuously
on the interrogation put to me on the sixteenth day of the present month,
and in particular on the question whether I had been forbidden sixteen
years ago by order of the Holy Office to hold, defend, or teach in any
fashion the View, which at that time already stood condemned, that the sun
is stationary and that the earth moves, it came to my mind to reread my
published Dialogue (as I had not ever done during the three preceding years)
in order to examine carefully whether there had issued from my pen, against
my firmest intention, inadvertently, any statement whereby the reader or the
authorities might argue in me either some taint of disobedience or anything
whatsoever else which could be conceived as contravening the orders of the
Holy Church; and since by the benign consent of the authorities I was free
to send my servant forth, I secured a copy of my book; and, taking it up,
I set myself to a careful reading and detailed study of it. Struck by it,
as I was, after so long an interval, as though by a new thing and the work
of another writer, I freely confess that it seemed to me at several points
written in such a way that a reader unfamiliar with my inmost thought would
have had some cause for thinking the arguments brought forth for the false
theory, the one I intended to refute, so drawn as to be more potent in
confirming that theory than easy to rebut; and two of these in particular,
the one concerning sunspots and the other the flux and reflux of the sea,
come to the reader’s ear with qualifications that seem more like robust
and vigorous confirmations than is fitting from a writer who held them as
inconclusive, as in truth I inwardly and truly held them and hold them to be,
and who desired, as I did, to refute them. And in order to excuse myself
in my own eyes for having fallen into an error so alien to my intention,
unable to satisfy myself fully by remarking that when one gives the arguments
of an adversary with the intention of rebutting them, one is obliged to set
them forth with precision (especially when one writes in the dialogue form),
and must not muffle them so as to put the adversary at a disadvantage-unable,
as I say, to satisfy myself fully with this excuse, I laid the blame on the
natural complacency any man feels towards his own subtlety and towards his
ability to show himself sharper than the common run of men, even to the point
of finding ingenious and convincing demonstrations of probability for false
propositions. Wherefore, although with Cicero I may be “more avid of glory
than is needful for me," if I were today faced with the task of setting forth
the same arguments, there is no doubt that I should weaken them in such a
way that they could not make an appearance of having that force which truly
and essentially they lack. My error was, I confess, one of empty ambition
and of pure heedlessness and inadvertence. And this is what I wished to say
on the subject of the matter that occurred to me in re-reading my book.
