---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 704
  Source:
    Title: Mahâ-Vagga
    Description: The Buddha's Fire Sermon
Tags:
  - Beauty-Peace=Peace=Serenity
  - 77
---
All things, O priests, are on fire. And what, O priests, are all these things
which are on fire?

The eye, O priests, is on fire; forms are on fire; eye-consciousness is on
fire; impressions received by the eye are on fire; and whatever sensation,
pleasant, unpleasant, or indifferent, originates in dependence on impressions
received by the eye, that also is on fire.

And with what are these on fire?

With the fire of passion, say I, with the fire of hatred, with the fire of
infatuation; with birth, old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, misery, grief,
and despair are they on fire.  The ear is on fire; sounds are on fire; ... the
nose is on fire; odors are on fire; ... the tongue is on fire; tastes are on
fire; ... the body is on fire; things tangible are on fire; ... the mind is on
fire; ideas are on fire; ... mind-consciousness is on fire; impressions
received by the mind are on fire; and whatever sensation, pleasant,
unpleasant, or indifferent, originates in dependence on impressions received
by the mind, that also is on fire. ...

Perceiving this, O priests, the learned and noble disciple conceives an
aversion for the eye, conceives an aversion for forms, conceives an aversion
for eye-consciousness, conceives an aversion for the impressions received by
the eye, ... conceives an aversion for the ear, conceives an aversion for
sounds, ... conceives an aversion for the nose, conceives an aversion for
odors, ... conceives an aversion for the tongue, conceives an aversion for
tastes, conceives an aversion for the body, conceives an aversion for things
tangible, ... conceives an aversion for the mind, conceives an aversion for
ideas, conceives an aversion for mind-consciousness, conceives an aversion for
the impressions received by the mind And in conceiving this aversion, he
becomes divested of passion, and by the absence of passion he becomes free,
and when he is free he becomes aware that he is free; and he knows that
rebirth is exhausted, that he has lived the holy life, that he has done what
it behooved him to do, and that he is no more for this world.
