---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Mary
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 230- 232
  Source:
    Title: Womanguides
By: Rosemary Radford Ruether
Title: The Divine Pleroma
---
The Wisdom of Solomon was written by an Alexandrian Jew of the second
century B.C. It reflects both the mythical cultures of the Egyptian
and Hellenistic world, which identified Goddesses with Wisdom, and also
philosophical concepts that speak of an immanent power of divine truth and
knowledge that comes forth from the transcendent world to found and guide
the cosmos. The predominant imagery for Wisdom is drawn from light. Wisdom
is like a spiritual effulgence that radiates from the divine source of
light. As light, Wisdom both reveals the divine and illumines our knowledge
of the divine. She is both the knowledge and the power of God immanent in
our midst, for she is the power through which God creates the world.

She is the image of God for she translates into form the unspoken or
unmanifest latency oftranscendent divinity. As agent of creation, she
translates divine potency into act in created beings. As revealer, she
translates the search for God into clear forms of knowledge and divine
precept. She is both the objective and subjective side of divine revelation
for she not only manifests the latent power of God but enters into the
seeker of truth and goodness and enables him to find knowledge and virtue.

This light imagery for Wisdom mingles with her description as feminine
to suggest another modality of relationship. Wisdom is a love-object of
the wise or “kingly” soul. Like the Goddess Isis, which probably has
influenced the image of Wisdom here, she is a wise and beautiful woman whom
the seeker after wisdom and virtue wishes to bring home as his bride. Like
Isis, she is a model of faithful, wifely love. She is the ideal wife
who can act as counselor, inspirer of virtue, and provider of peace and
happiness to the man who comes home to her weary from the day’s battles.

Thus, in spite of the image of female power conveyed in this Wisdom text,
the interpretive stance of the writer is androcentric. One can assume
that the Almighty from whom she arises is thought ofas the patriarchal
God of Iudaism. Since Wisdom plays the same theological roles (except for
incarnation) as the Logos of the New Testament, we might speak of her as
“Daughter” of God. As such, she functions as a feminine mediator between
the male God and humanity. Moreover, the seeker after Wisdom is thought of
exclusively in male terms. As a “kingly” person, he is a male spiritual
and social aristocrat. Thus Wisdom really provides no place where women
can identify their own personhood as the center ofagency and action. As
in patriarchal culture generally, the femininity of Wisdom operates to
mediate between male self and male self, in this case the transcendent
Almighty as divine male selfand the seeker after Wisdom as human male
self. The femininity of Wisdom is containable in this androcentric culture
precisely because it remains relative to and auxiliary to these male ego
dramas rather than acting as a focus of female personhood in her own right.

Although an androgynous concept of the Trinity was repressed in Greco-Roman
Christianity, Syriac Christianity carried on the Hebrew tradition of
the feminine Wisdom and translated it into a feminine image of the Holy
Spirit. This feminine Holy Spirit was thought of as mother and nurturer of
the Christian. She was closely linked with baptism as the womb of rebirth
and with regeneration imaged as breast-feeding of the reborn soul. There
is a close parallelism between Christ, as one born from the womb of the
Virgin Mary by the power of the Holy Spirit, and reborn Christians who
likewise are to be virginal people through the gestating and birthing
power of the Holy Spirit.

This kind ofimagery ofthe Holy Spirit as the female power of gestation,
birth, and nurturing is evident in the Syriac Ode of Solomon, No. 19. Here
God is thought of as androgynous, containing breasts that burst with
milk like a nursing mother’s. The Holy Spirit is the power that milks
these full breasts ofthe Father, and she herself is this full bosom of
the Father. She bestows this milk of God upon Christians, giving them
thereby regenerate life.

This milk from the breasts of God is thought of as the power of gesta, tion
and birth by which the Virgin Mary conceived and gave birth to Christ. Thus
the beliefthat Mary “conceived through the power of the Holy Spirit"
is not imaged as analogous to the male impregnating seed but as a female
generative power that derives from the milk of the mothering breasts of
God. Giving birth is itselfseen not as a painful, much less a polluted,
act but as both painless and powerful, a creative act that mirrors the
generation or regeneration of the New Creation itself by God.

In a parallel Ode No. 36, this mothering Holy Spirit is thought of
as lifting Christ (and the reborn Christian) from the earth to heaven,
presenting him before the divine throne of perfection and glory. Thereby,
Christ (and the Christian) become truly Son of Man, the image ofdivine
perfection and glory. Again, as in the Wisdom text, the ultimate ego-center
of the Transcendent God, as well as Christ and the reborn Christian, is
seen as male. The birthing power of the Holy Spirit, however striking and
powerful, mediates the power ofthis male God to the human male selfand,
in turn, exalts this male selfto heaven to stand before the throne of
the male God.

Although females were doubtless included among these virginal, reborn
Christians of Syriac Christianity, the persona of the reborn Christian, like
that of Christ, is normatively male. Female power remains auxiliary to this
male-centered drama of mediation, rebirth, and transformation. The female
person can relate to this text either by including herself, anomalously,
as the reborn Christian or by imagining herself as playing an auxiliary
role of birthgiver to a male offspring whose quest for redemption she
supports and promotes through her motherly efforts.
