---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 7 - ䷆ - Shih
    Line: 1
    Page: 53-55
By: Jonathan Swift
---
He asked me what were the usual causes or motives that made one country go to
war with another. I answered they were innumerable; but I should only mention
a few of the chief. Sometimes the ambition of princes, who never think they
have land or people enough to govern; sometimes the corruption of ministers,
who engage their master in a war in order to stifle or divert the clamor
of the subjects against their evil administration. Difference in opinions
hath cost many millions of lives： for instance, whether flesh be bread,
or bread be flesh; whether the juice of a certain berry be blood or wine;
whether whistling be a vice or a virtue; whether it is better to kiss a post,
or throw it into the fire; what is the best colour for a coat, whether black,
white, red, or gray; and whether it should be long or short, narrow or wide,
dirty or clean; with many more. Neither are any wars so furious and bloody,
or of so long continuance, as those occasioned by difference in opinion,
especially if it be in things indifferent.

Sometimes the quarrel between two princes is to decide which of them
shall dispossess a third of his dominions, where neither of them pretend
to any right. Sometimes one prince quarrelleth with another, for fear the
other should quarrel with him. Sometimes a war is entered upon, because
the enemy is too strong, and sometimes because he is too weak. Sometimes
our neighbours want the things which we have, or have the things we want;
and we both fight, till they take ours or give us theirs. It is a very
justifiable cause of a war to invade a country after the people have been
wasted by famine, destroyed by pestilence, or embroiled by factions among
themselves. It is justifiable to enter into war against our nearest ally,
when one of his towns lies convenient for us, or a territory of land, that
would render our dominions round and complete. If a prince sends forces
into a nation, where the people are poor and ignorant, he may lawfully put
half of them to death, and make slaves of the rest, in order to civilize
and reduce them from their barbarous way of living. It is a very kingly,
honourable, and frequent practice, when one prince desires the assistance
of another to secure him against an invasion, that the assistant, when
he hath driven out the invader, should seize on the dominions himself,
and kill, imprison, or banish the prince he came to relieve. Alliance
by blood or marriage is a frequent cause of war between princes; and
the nearer the kindred is, the greater is their disposition to quarrel;
poor nations are hungry, and rich nations are proud; and pride and hunger
will ever be at variance.
