---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 388-389
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Inner Pilgrimage
  - 924
  - 288
Glossary:
  - Term: Khizr
    Definition: Lit. "The green one’. A mysterious personage or ’solitary
      one’ (fard) omnipresent in Sufic lore, said to have lived in the time
      of Abraham, sometimes identified with Elias and St George, and alluded
      to without name in the Qur'ân as the companion of Moses.
Format: verse
By: Rûmî
Commentary: |
  ‘One can understand why a person like Râbiah Adawiyah could neglect
  the pilgrimage to Mecca, since she had accomplished the “pilgrimage of
  the heart”, which means that she had attained the "peace" which
  “pre-exists” beneath the tumult of exteriorized existence"
  (Burckhardt： in Éludes Trad.. 1952. p. 3 11).
---
Bâyazîd. on his journey (to the Ka'ba). sought much to find some one
that was the Khizr of his time.

He espied an old man with a stature (bent) like the new moon： he saw
in him the majesty and (lofty) speech of (holy) men：

His eyes sightless, and his heart (illumined) as the sun： like an
elephant dreaming of Hindustân. ...

He (the old man) said. ‘Whither art thou bound. O Bâyazîd? To what
place wouldst thou take the baggage of travel in a strange land?’

Bâyazîd answered. 'I start for the Ka'ba at daybreak.' ‘Eh.' cried the
other, 'what hast thou as provisions for the road?'

‘I have two hundred silver dirhems,' said he： ‘look, (they are) tied
fast in the corner of my cloak.’

He said, ‘Make a circuit round me seven times, and reckon this (to be)
better than the circumambulation (of the Ka'ba) in the pilgrimage：

And lay those dirhems before me. O generous one. Know that thou hast
made the greater pilgrimage and that thy desire has been achieved：

(That) thou hast (also) performed the lesser pilgrimage and gained the
life everlasting： (that) thou hast become pure (sâf) and sped up (the
Hill of) Purity (Safa).

By the truth of the Truth (God) whom thy soul hath seen. (1 swear)
that He hath chosen me above His House.

Albeit the Ka'ba is the House of His religious service, my form too.
in which I was created, is the House of His inmost consciousness.

Never since God made the Ka'ba hath He gone into it. and none but the
Living (God) hath ever gone into this House (of mine).

When thou hast seen me. thou hast seen God： thou hast circled round
the Ka'ba of Sincerity.

To serve me is to obey and glorify God： beware thou think not that
God is separate from me

Open thine eyes well and look on me. that thou mayst behold the Light
of God in man.’
