---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LV
    Page: 95-96
Title: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning
  of some without discretion
---
Some men the fiend will deceive on this manner. Full wonderfully he will
enflame their brains to maintain God’s law, and to destroy sin in all other
men. He will never tempt them with a thing that is openly evil; he maketh them
like busy prelates watching over all the degrees of Christian men’s living,
as an abbot over his monks. ALL men will they reprove of their defaults,
right as they had cure of their souls： and yet they think that they do
not else for God, unless they tell them their defaults that they see. And
they say that they be stirred thereto by the fire of charity, and of God’s
love in their hearts： and truly they lie, for it is with the fire of hell,
welling in their brains and in their imagination.

That this is sooth, it seemeth by this that followeth. The devil is a spirit,
and of his own nature he hath no body, more than hath an angel. But yet
nevertheless what time that he or an angel shall take any body by leave of
God, to make any ministration to any man in this life; according as the work
is that he shall minister, thereafter in likeness is the quality of his body
in some part. Ensample of this we have in Holy Writ. As oft as any angel
was sent in body in the Old Testament and in the New also, evermore it was
shewed, either by his name or by some instrument or quality of his body, what
his matter or his message was in spirit. On the same manner it fareth of the
fiend. For when he appeareth in body, he figureth in some quality of his body
what his servants be in spirit. Ensample of this may be seen in one instead
of all these other. For as I have conceived by some disciples of necromancy,
the which have it in science for to make advocation of wicked spirits, and
by some unto whom the fiend hath appeared in bodily likeness; that in what
bodily likeness the fiend appeareth, evermore he hath but one nostril, and
that is great and wide, and he will gladly cast it up that a man may see in
thereat to his brain up in his head. The which brain is nought else but the
fire of hell, for the fiend may have none other brain; and if he might make
a man look in thereto, he wants no better. For at that looking, he should
lose his wits for ever. But a perfect prentice of necromancy knoweth this
well enough, and can well ordain therefore, so that he provoke him not.

Therefore it is that I say, and have said, that evermore when the devil
taketh any body, he figureth in some quality of his body what his servants
be in spirit. For he enflameth so the imagination of his contemplatives with
the fire of hell, that suddenly without discretion they shoot out their
curious conceits, and without any advisement they will take upon them to
blame other men’s defaults over soon： and this is because they have but
one nostril ghostly. For that division that is in a man’s nose bodily,
and the which departeth the one nostril from the tother, betokeneth that
a man should have discretion ghostly; and can dissever the good from the
evil, and the evil from the worse, and the good from the better, ere that
he gave any full doom of anything that he heard or saw done or spoken about
him. And by a man’s brain is ghostly understood imagination; for by nature
it dwelleth and worketh in the head.
