---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LXXIII
    Page: 117
Title: How that after the likeness of Moses, of Bezaleel, and of Aaron
  meddling them about the Ark of the Testament, we profit on three manners
  in this grace of contemplation, for this grace is figured in that Ark.
---
Three men there were that most principally meddled them with this Ark of
the Old Testament： Moses, Bezaleel, Aaron. Moses learned in the mount
of our Lord how it should be made. Bezaleel wrought it and made it in the
Veil after the ensample that was shewed in the mountain. And Aaron had it
in keeping in the Temple, to feel it and see it as oft as him liked.

At the likeness of these three, we profit on three manners in this grace of
contemplation. Sometime we profit only by grace, and then we be likened unto
Moses, that for all the climbing and the travail that he had into the mount
might not come to see it but seldom： and yet was that sight only by the
shewing of our Lord when Him liked to shew it, and not for any desert of
his travail. Sometime we profit in this grace by our own ghostly cunning,
helped with grace, and then be we likened to Bezaleel, the which might not
see the Ark ere the time that he had made it by his own travail, helped with
the ensample that was shewed unto Moses in the mount. And sometime we profit
in this grace by other men’s teaching, and then be we likened to Aaron,
the which had it in keeping and in custom to see and feel the Ark when him
pleased, that Bezaleel had wrought and made ready before to his hands.

Lo! ghostly friend, in this work, though it be childishly and lewdly spoken,
I bear, though I be a wretch unworthy to teach any creature, the office
of Bezaleel： making and declaring in manner to thine hands the manner of
this ghostly Ark. But far better and more worthily than I do, thou mayest
work if thou wilt be Aaron： that is to say, continually working therein
for thee and for me. Do then so I pray thee, for the love of God Almighty.
And since we be both called of God to work in this work, I beseech thee for
God’s love fulfil in thy part what lacketh of mine.
