---
By: Charles Robert Darwin
Source:
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "3 - \u4DC2 - Chun"
    Line: 6
    Page: 25-26
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
---
\[This] conclusion ... will, I regret to think, be highly distasteful
to many. But there can hardly be a doubt that we are descended from
barbarians. The astonishment which I felt on first seeing a party of
Fuegians on a wild and broken shore will never be forgotten by me, for the
reflections at once rushed into my mind - such were our ancestors. These men
were absolutely naked and bedaubed with paint, their long hair was tangled,
their mouths frothed with excitement, and their expression was wild, startled
and distrustful. They possessed hardly any arts, and like wild animals lived
on what they could catch; they had no government, and were merciless to any
one not of their own tribe. He who has seen a savage in his native land
will not feel much shame if forced to acknowledge that the blood of some
more humble creature flows in his veins. For my own part I would as soon
be descended from that heroic little monkey who braved his dreaded enemy in
order to save the life of his keeper, or from that old baboon, who, descending
from the mountains, carried away in triumph his young comrade from a crowd of
astonished dogs -- as from a savage who delights to torture his enemies, offers
up bloody sacrifices, practices infanticides without remorse, treats his wives
like slaves, knows no decency, and is haunted by the grossest superstitions.

Man may be excused for feeling some pride at having risen, though not through
his own exertions, to the very summit of the organic scale; and the fact
of his having thus risen, instead of having been aboriginally placed there,
may give him hope for a still higher destiny in the distant future. But we
are not here concerned with hopes or fears, only with the truth as far as our
reason permits us to discover it; and I have given the evidence to the best
of my ability. We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that man,
with all his noble qualities, with sympathy which feels for the most debased,
with benevolence which extends not only to other men but to the humblest
creature, with his godlike intellect which has penetrated into the movements
and constitution of the solar system -- with all these exalted powers --
man still bears in his bodily frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin.
