---
Tags:
  - Surrender=The Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 388-389
  Source:
    Title: Krishnamurti's Journal
By: J. Krishnamurti
---
One has to be a light to oneself; this light is the law. There is no
other law. All the other laws are made by thought and so fragmentary
and contradictory. To be a light to oneself is not to follow the light of
another, however reasonable, logical, historical, and however convincing. You
cannot be a light to yourself if you are in the dark shadows of authority,
of dogma, of conclusion. Morality is not put together by thought; it
is not the outcome of environmental pressure; it is not of yesterday,
of tradition. Morality is the child of love and love is not desire and
pleasure. Sexual or sensory enjoyment is not love.

High in the mountains there were hardly any birds; there were some crows,
there were deer and an occasional bear. The huge redwoods, the silent ones,
were everywhere, dwarfing all other trees. It was a magnificent country
and utterly peaceful, for no hunting was allowed. Every animal, every tree
and flower was protected. Sitting under one of those massive redwoods,
one was aware of the history of man and the beauty of the earth. A fat red
squirrel passed by most elegantly, stopping a few feet away, watching and
wondering what you were doing there. The earth was dry, though there was
a stream nearby. Not a leaf stirred and the beauty of silence was among
the trees. Going slowly along the narrow path, round a bend was a bear
with four cubs as large as big cats. They rushed off to crawl up trees
and the mother faced one without a movement, without a sound. About fifty
feet separated us; she was enormous, brown, and prepared. One immediately
turned one’s back on her and left. Each understood that there was no
fear and no intention to hurt, but all the same one was glad to be among
the protecting trees, squirrels and the scolding jays.

Freedom is to be a light to oneself; then it is not an abstraction, a
thing conjured up by thought. Actual freedom is freedom from dependency,
attachment, from the craving for experience. Freedom from the very structure
of thought is to be a light to oneself. In this light all action takes
place and thus it is never contradictory. Contradiction exists only when
that law, light, is separate from action, when the actor is separate
from action. The ideal, the principle, is the barren movement of thought
and cannot coexist with this light; one denies the other. This light,
this law, is separate from you; where the observer is, this light,
this love, is not. The structure of the observer is put together by
thought, which is never new, never free. There is no " how," no system,
no practice. There is only the seeing which is the doing. You have to see,
not through the eyes ofanother. This light, this law, is neither yours
nor that of another. There is only light. This is love.
