---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Consciousness, Transcendence
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 183
  Source:
    Title: On Nature and the Environment
By: J. Krishnamurti
---
To be conscious means to be aware, to know, to perceive, to observe. The
content of consciousness is your belief, your pleasure, your experience,
the particular knowledge that you have gathered, either through external
experience or through your fears, attachments, pain, the agony of
loneliness, sorrow, the search for something more than mere physical
existence; all that is one's consciousness with its content. The content
makes the consciousness. Without content there is not the consciousness
as we know it. That consciousness, which is very complex, contradictory,
with extraordinary vitality, is it yours? Is thought yours? Or is there only
thinking, which is neither of the East nor the West? There is only thinking,
which is common to all mankind, whether rich or poor. Technicians, with
their extraordinary capacity, or the monks who withdraw from the world
and consecrate themselves to an idea, are still thinking.

Is this consciousness common to all mankind? Wherever one goes, one
sees suffering, pain, anxiety, loneliness, insanity, fear, the urge
of desire. It is common, it is the ground on which every human being
stands. Your consciousness is the consciousness of humanity, the rest of
humanity. If one understands the nature of this -- that you are the rest
ofmankind, though we may have different names, live in different parts
of the world, be educated in different ways, he affluent or very poor --
when you go behind the mask, you are like the rest of mankind： neurotic,
aching, suffering loneliness and despair, believing in some illusion,
and so on. Whether you go to the East or West, this is so. You may not
like it; you may like to think that you are totally independent, free,
individual. But when you observe very deeply, you are the rest of humanity.
