---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 324-326
  Source:
    Title: Return to the Garden - A Journey of Discovery
By: Shakti Gawain
Title: Facing Our Shadow
---
One of the most important aspects of healing ourselves and the earth is the
willingness to face our “shadow” -- the feelings and parts ofourselves
that we have rejected, repressed, or disowned. Our society has tremendous
prohibitions against feeling too much. We are afraid to feel too much fear,
hurt, sadness, or anger, and oftentimes we are also afraid to feel too
much love, passion, or joy! And we’re definitely afraid of our natural
sensuality and sexuality.

As children we learn to reject and repress these unacceptable feelings
and parts of ourselves. Most of us are encouraged either to repress our
vulnerable feelings and become strong and powerful, or to repress our
power and aggression and be gentle and vulnerable. Or we may repress both
vulnerability and power (as well as sexuality, of course) and become nice,
safe, middle-of-the-roaders. In any case we lose not only major parts of
our petsonality and being, but an enormous amount of our life force.

The feelings and parts of ourselves that we have repressed do not go
away just because we don’t want them. They are necessary parts of us,
parts we actually need for our survival. If they are not allowed their
natural expression, they go underground and fester inside of us, building
up steam, needing eventual release. If we do not find ways to express them,
they begin to “leak out" in distorted ways, or they begin to lead us into
life situations which will give them a chance to emerge. For example, ifyou
have repressed your power, you will have anger building up inside of you,
lfyou don’t find a way to express your anger in a direct, constructive
way, it will leak out as indirect, covert hostility, or it will eventually
burst forth as explosive rage or violence. It might well attract you toward
angry people, with the unconscious intention of triggering your own anger.

If attempts to find expression fail or are blocked, the repressed feelings
will eventually make your body sick. It is my belief that most illnesses
are caused by repressed or disowned energies within us.

Personal healing on all levels -- physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual
-- comes when we get in touch with our disowned energies. As we begin to
accept them as vital parts of ourselves, we begin to find safe, constructive
modes of expression. Once we get to know these parts of ourselves, we
find they are not as scary as we had imagined. In fact, when they are
expressed and integrated, they take their place as important facets of
our nature. Through integrating all aspects of ourselves, we become whole.

Everything in the universe, including every part of ourselves, wants love
and acceptance. Anything in life that we don’t accept will simply make
trouble for us until we make peace with it. Once we do, the trouble is over.

Here is an image I have found useful to illustrate this point： Suppose
you lived in a large mansion, but only occupied a few of the rooms. These
rooms are bright, clean, and nicely furnished and decorated. You lead a
reasonably good life in them. However, you never enter any of the other
rooms in the mansion because you have been told there may be frightening
things in them. You keep all the doors in the unoccupied part of the
house locked and spend a lot of time worrying about what might escape
from the dark part of the house into your safe area. At night you imagine
all kinds of noises. A great deal of your life energy is taken up with
worrying and defending yourself.

Finally you become tired of living this way, and decide to take control
of the situation and examine some of the rooms. Perhaps you ask a trusted
friend or two to come with you, so you will feel safer. You take a big,
bright lantern and venture into the first unknown room. You find some
unattractive, old-fashioned furniture, cobwebs, and a few beautiful
antiques. Once you clean up the room, give away the things you don’t
need, and decorate it to enhance the treasures you’ve found, you have
another unique and beautiful room in your home. When you are ready,
you can proceed to the next room. Eventually, you will find yourself
living in a large, beautiful, welllighted mansion. Since you no longer
have to spend your time defending yourself against the unknown darkness,
you can turn your energy to more creative things.

In order to become “enlightened,” we must shine the light of
consciousness into any dark places that we have not yet explored. This is
true on a planetary level as well as a personal one. Just as we individuals
have repressed aspects of ourselves, the mass consciousness has disowned
much of its energy. So we have a large collective shadow to explore.

In modern society, much of what has been repressed involves the energies
related to the earth -- our primal selves. We have identified too frequently
with the masculine rational, active, work-oriented, orderly principles and
denied the more feminine emotional, intuitive, sensual aspects. I believe
this is why we are having an overwhelming epidemic of drug addiction --
drugs release those disowned energies. These energies have to be expressed
somehow, or we would not survive. The healing for our drug problems will
come as we find more natural and constructive ways for society to support
all of us, and young people in particular, in expressing energies that
have been restricted, such as intuition, artistic creativity, sexuality,
playfulness, and just “being.”

We are also having difficulty right now dealing with our natural
aggressive energy. In previous times, societies channeled this energy
through great numbers of men engaging in warfare. In modern times, this
is increasingly dangerous and unacceptable. Aggression is frowned upon in
civilized society, except in a few sanctioned ways -- through sports or
business. So we have our leaders toying frustratedly with their weapons
systems, not daring to use them but not willing to give them up, either,
and we have increasing outbreaks ofviolence in our cities as well. We
need to find constructive ways for all of us, men and women, to channel
our natural aggressive energy creatively.

Many people, especially those in the spiritual and new age movements,
believe that we can bring peace and light to the world by focusing on
the light, trying to be unconditionally loving, visualizing peace, and so
forth. There is a fundamental misunderstanding here. By trying to focus
only on the things we deem “positive” and ignoring or repressing
the rest, we are simply perpetuating the polarization oflight and dark
forces. Ironically, this further distorts and empowers the very energies
we are trying to avoid.

We must deeply recognize that there is no split between “spiritual”
and “unspiritual,” good and bad. All aspects of life are elements of
the life force and facets of the divine. True healing comes from owning
and accepting all of life’s energies within ourselves.

Ultimately, the collective healing of our planet can only come through the
personal commitment of us all as individuals, in exploring and embracing
the shadow in our own lives.
