---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 13 - ䷌ - T'ung Jen
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 101-102
By: Thomas Edward Lawrence
---
Except that all its events were happy, this day was not essentially unlike
Feisal’s every day. ... The roads to Wejh swarmed with envoys and
volunteers and great sheikhs riding in to swear allegiance. ... Feisal
swore new adherents solemnly on the Koran between his hands, “to wait
while he waited, march when he marched, to yield obedience to no Turk, to
deal kindly with all who spoke Arabic (whether Bagdadi, Alleppine, Syrian,
or pure-blooded) and to put independence above life, family, and goods.”

He also began to confront them at once, in his presence, with their tribal
enemies, and to compose their feuds. An account of profit and loss would
be struck between the parties, with Feisal modulating and interceding
between them, and often paying the balance, or contributing towards it
from his own funds, to hurry on the pact. During the two years Feisal
so laboured daily, putting together and arranging in their natural order
the innumerable tiny pieces which made up Arabian society, and combining
them into his one design of war against the Turks. There was no blood
feud left active in any of the districts through which he had passed,
and he was Court of Appeal, ultimate and unchallenged, for western Arabia.

He showed himself worthy of this achievement. He never gave a partial
decision, nor a decision so impracticably just that it must lead to
disorder. No Arab ever impugned his judgments or questioned his wisdom and
competence in tribal business. By patiently sifting out right and wrong,
by his tact, his wonderful memory, he gained authority over the Nomads from
Medina to Damascus and beyond. He was recognized as a force transcending
tribe, superseding blood chiefs, greater than jealousies. The Arab movement
became in the best sense national, since within it all Arabs were as one,
and for it private interests must be set aside.
