---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 315-321
  Source:
    Title: Twin Souls
By:
  - Patricia Joudry
  - Maurie D. Pressman
---
The reality of evil is a well'kept secret, guarded by the dark forces
themselves; for they thrive on concealment. In contrast, the forces
of Light wish always to be known. The power of Light increases as it is
brought to consciousness. Darkness loses its power when revealed, for we
are then able to see it in action, recognize its purpose, and employ it
so that it no longer employs us.

Fascism, racism, and religious wars have all demonstrated how the dark
powers foment hatred among human beings. The war between modern feminism
and the male gender is another example. This is our present and immediate
concern.

Each forward thrust ofevolution evokes an equal and opposite reaction from
the opposing tide. The liberation of women from ancient repression holds
the prospect -- indeed the eventual certainty -- of improved relations
between the sexes. The spirit of the Eternal Feminine will be free to
soar and inspire to new heights the Eternal Masculine, the other side of
itself. The masculine spirit, also, has long been separated from its true
nature, despite apparent male supremacy in the world.

Men have had no real joy in their power, for joy comes through
other channels. Men are seeking their joy now, as they struggle toward
spirituality. But they are like creatures caught in an oil spill, struggling
to be free of the sticky tar, the same tar that blackened their ancestors
and continues to blacken the minds of undeveloped individuals today.

The seeds ofwar were planted early, as far back as the first man and the
first woman. From the beginning of human history, men have possessed the
power in this world. They did not seize it; it was accorded them in the
Plan ofthings. By his nature, unevolved man was fully yang, aggressive and
selfassertive. Thousands of years would elapse before his tempering yin
would unfold within him. The undeveloped woman was his total opposite. She
was all yin, entirely passive, lacking any of the strength that would
later flower to equal and parallel that of her partner. Primitive man and
primitive woman were a natural fit, and for a long time the arrangement
caused no trouble. They were preoccupied enough with remaining alive.

Civilization advanced and every advance was met with opposition from the
mounting wave of evil emanating from the dark psychic pool of the world. Men
abused their power and perpetrated cruelties on men and women alike. Men
of old are not to be excused for their acts, but neither should the blame
be placed on men of today, many of whom are working toward the next step
in liberation -- the freeing of all persons from the down-pulling tide.

If blame there must be, let it be placed where it belongs -- at the
door of the hidden powers of evil, the forces opposing life and growth,
willing the destruction of the world, and dedicated to maintaining and
increasing the separateness of souls. Separateness prolongs the life and
usefulness of evil entities; the ultimate reunion of all will spell their
dissolution. We shall call them the Separatists; for their every impulse is
divisive, as opposed to the guiding agencies of Light, ever urging to union.

The Separatists laid the groundwork well for the uprising of women and
their demands for equality. Then they delivered their master stroke,
which was to fan the flames of women’s anger to a place far past the
point of usefulness.

The purpose of the feminist movement was the righting of ancient imbalances
between the sexes. In a reactive imbalance, men now carry the weight
of blame for all of history’s crimes and misdemeanors against women;
hence their anger. There is the danger that feminism, wrongly used, could
go the way of past masculine dominance. Female individual and collective
power is now being awakened. Disunity arises when the radical aspect of
feminism is carried too far, obscuring the need for men and women to
communicate and love and be intimate with each other. Masculinity has
paraded as patriarchy in the past. There is the possibility that feminism
(not femininity) could become a matriarchy, a patriarchy in disguise.

No person is blameless in the matter of dark inspiration. Influences
from the collective shadow seek access through human temptation. They
gain entry through the shadow area of temptation, which exists in each
individuals unconscious mind. The great challenge that faces us is to
withstand such temptation, to understand and recognize the forces that
are playing upon us, so that we may reject the lower and embrace the higher.

Freud’s discovery of the interior of the mind underscored the fact that
early experiences shape and influence later ones. The former function like
color filters in front ofcamera lenses. They do not change the picture;
rather, they modify, it, lending their affective influence to those
experiences that occur later in life. Studies documented by Sigmund Freud,
Iohn Bowlby, Margaret Mahler, and many other psychoanalytic investigators,
demonstrate that a person’s earliest experiences at the mother’s
breast produce feelings of either optimism or pessimism that will last
throughout life. Rings of influence, or shapers, are created in tandem at
other crucial developmental periods, notably that of adolescence. Further
shapers are continually at work, such as the astronomical and astrological
forces, which lend their influence to gravity and to the newly entered
individual. Similarly, influences of darkness and light surround us
in mutual contention The shifting light and shadow from these powerful
antagonists falls over the rings within rings already coloring the events
and the characters, the feelings and the expressions, of every human being.

Yet we are not helpless before these influences. The directing center is
the spiritual will, the essential Self, which chooses between the lower
and the higher. To make informed choices we need to become familiar with
the superordinant, those spiritual realms that have been described in
the ancient mysteries and the core religions. Those realms surround us,
exchange with us and receive from us. Like stalactite meeting stalagmite,
the upper and the lower grow toward each other. The surrounding forces
ofdarkness and light approach each other too, reaching out to draw unto
themselves human beings oflike mind.

Dark forces are easily attracted to the neurotic and psychotic aspects
ofthe individual. This is because the earlier and more primitive fixations,
contained within psychosis and neurosis, come from an earlier and more
primitive place in ontogenetic development. That which is more primitive
is more selfish and cruel, more divisive, more secretive, more separate
and destructive. And so it is that evil forces, draw to themselves those
with underdeveloped personalities, the proclivities and desires to exercise
cruelty and victimize their fellows.

At the far end of the scale, we can discern the satanic power enthroned in
the caverns of the psychic underworld, ruling over the Black Lodge. The
Black Lodge is that collection of satanic spirits who are opposed to the
Light and have directed the massive crimes of history. In the day-to-day
course of events, their lesser servants -- evil spirits of the lower
astral -- attach themselves to individuals of every kind, male and female,
inspiring acts of child abuse, racial hatred, and the many perversions
that cripple the human spirit. In a less noticeable way they invade the
minds ofintelligent, well-intentioned persons to sow seeds of separatism
in every patch of likely soil within the unconscious mind.

It is in the relation between the sexes that the dark force counts its
proudest gains, in suffering imposed and evolution delayed; for the realm
of love is where it could be most seriously threatened. Any blossoming
of love draws the attention of the opposition. If the love is ofa high
order, the opposition intensifies and continues to intensify until it
either wins the day or is vanquished by the force oflove itself. The
outcome is clear-cut in every case： there is no middle way; either love
or evil triumphs. It is a pattern we watch for in all our love stories,
for we see in it the working ofa cosmic truth.

Long before Oedipus appeared, the dark spiritual agencies that seek
to foster separation recognized love relationships as fertile ground
for human conflict. There is scarcely anyone who has not some aspect,
stemming from childhood insecurity or trauma, that can be manipulated into
hostility toward the sexual partner or the entire opposite gender. At this
root the dark forces strike for their avowed purpose： to obstruct the
course oflove on earth. Love between man and woman is the very basis of
human life and the springboard to cosmic union. Schisms created in these
vital centers impede the work of the Universe itself.

The deep schism between male and female created by the women’s movement
was predictable. The higher forces expected it to be transitional, however,
and so it will be. But the transition has been slowed by the Separatists,
whose tactic is to spread confusion about what constitutes feminine and
masculine identity.

The twin union can be realized only between a man complete and Certain in
his manhood and a woman strong and joyous in her womanhood. W'hat is it to
be a woman? What is it to be a man? Are the two simply the same, anatomy
aside? The Sei')aratists would have us think so, for to remain in this
limbo would nullify the polarity that moves life forward. Alternatively
they offer us the simpleminded slogan of divisiveness： Woman is passive,
man is aggressive.

Woman was passive long ago, in the early stages of her evolution. She can
be wholly passive still, when the shadow influence has her in its grip. But
in its developed state, passivity becomes receptivity, that which takes
in, gestates, nurtures, brings to birth, and provides a clear channel
for the intuition, the direct line to God and creativity itself. It
is the yin energy of the Eternal Feminine, and it is not her treasure
alone but shared with man. Similarly, the aggressiveness of early man,
or man in the shadow, transmutes to creative initiative as he grows into
his fuller stature and is revealed in light.

The creative power of the Eternal Masculine resides also in woman,
to be employed in her unique way, flowing back to him refined and
beautified. These are the conditions oftrue equality, the kind that need
not be fought for; they are built into the soul, needing only to come
to recognition and maturity. Such fine distinctions are urged upon us by
the guiding forces of Light, while the retrogressive powers work to bind
us to the simplistic stereotypes and social myths that breed resentment
of those we are fated to greatly love. To be a woman or to be a man,
therefore, is to stand on the ground of our gendered self, allowing it
to color the contra-gender within, so that they become as one. A man is
yang-based with yin rising; a woman is yin-based with yang rising. They
are each within each, and the balances and proportions are the measure
of their maturity and gender strength. A truly strong woman is strong
in her femininity, as well as in her secondary masculine character; a
fully masculine man exhibits all the best of his yang qualities along
with yin sensitivities in high degree. When a self-actualized man and
self-actualized woman meet and bond, their gender characteristics become
shared, flowing in harmonious exchange.

They do not become homogeneous. Male/female energies are separate and
distinct; they can be recognized at work within us, and, recognizing them,
we can employ them creatively, bringing them into balance and hastening
our progress toward the completing union.

In Eastern philosophy yang and yin are defined as follows： yang is the
initiating impulse, which divides and delineates; yin is the responsive
impulse, which nurtures and reunites. Without yang nothing would come into
being; without yin all that comes into being would die. Yang is mental
activity in its forceful aspect, yin the imaginative and poetic, exalting
the merely mental to the beautiful. Yang goes ahead with things, yin
contains things within herselfand knows their nature without effort. Yang
does, yin is. Yang in his givingness bestows the gifts; yin in her being
receives, preserves, enhances, and redistributes them.

Yang constructs, yin instructs; yang implements, yin complements; yang
is strength, yin endurance; yang is knowledge, yin the mystery that
reveals itself and becomes knowledge. Yang is the discoverer, yin lures
toward greater discovery. Yang is the self-developer, inspired by yin, the
selfdedicator, for her development and his dedication. Yang is the lover,
and therefore beloved; yin is the beloved and the source of love. Yang
is will and yin is wisdom, and one without the other is neither, and
together they are joy. Yang is as the day, turning into night, and yin
the night preceding the day; the one is the force that drives the waves
of the ocean forward, the other the force that draws them back so that
they may go forward again.

Male and female, yang and yin, are the principles that rule the Universe,
demonstrating the separation ofa unity into opposites. On the physical
level the opposites are experienced as sex. Sex is the ruling force in the
world. It is the urge that brings the opposites together to create a vessel
for the incoming soul, and thus populates the earth. As a palliative for
the loneliness of separation, it rules supreme. And sex is unmatched in
the opportunities it offers for the expression of love and of hate. At its
finest it allows a glimpse of higher soul states in its ecstatic orgasmic
moments. The craving for that ecstasy is what goads the darkened mind in
its acts of depravity.

But there comes, at last a new balanCe of forces, a point at which
the lower powers begin to lose ground to the higher. People are fond
of saying that nothing or no one is all black or white. This is true;
it is the condition of our world. But ultimately, in the course of our
incarnations, one force gains supremacy over the other. It is boldly
stated in saintly beings such as Mother Teresa and Albert Schweitzer,
and on the other side, in such as Hitler and Stalin. Thus is depicted
the love energy winning or losing the battle for the individual soul.

That separation is paralleled on the inner planes of existence. The struggle
begins in the astral, which is closest to the earth. The astral world has
several levels, the lowest of which is of near material substance. The
inhabitants of the lower astral are those who have held too strongly
to the material and selfish pleasures oflife, who could not yield them
during physical existence and must therefore cling to them for a long
time yet. These are the creatures who would inhabit the physical bodies
ofsusceptible persons to continue to play out their selfish motives. Their
sexual desires also crave a physical outlet. Many of these individuals
have passed over with sadistic impulses： unchecked, and they prowl the
psychic aura of the earth hunting for suitable human instruments through
whom to express themselves. But other souls, those capable of love, pass
quickly to the higher astral after shedding the physical body. In this,
the emotional world, the higher emotions become spiritualized and infused
with light, while the lower sink from their own weight. Sexuality, the
urge for union between gender opposites, continues in transcendent form
throughout the heights. Eternally, masculine and feminine will exchange
in love and the creative expansion of love that issues from it. In the
finer vehicles of the spirit, that which manifested as physical sex finds
expression befitting a higher plane.

In the purer stages of the astral, spirit bodies unite in ways more
loving and more ecstatic than anything known to mortals. The unions are
between male and female souls yearning toward the twin, as they did on
earth. This is where the twins find each other if they have not done so
in physical life.

They then move as one to the next higher plane, the mental. This is the
domain of pure mind. The only emotion remaining is love： mental love,
the love of souls, embracing all feelings, purified and ennobled. Here the
spirit finds itself clothed in a body of exquisite lightness, sensitivity
and power of expression. It is also more substantial, being closer to
the Ultimate Reality. The soul is always embodied, but in finer and finer
substance with greater capacity for rapture as it ascends.

Union between beings composed of mind-stuff would be bliss uncontainable,
were it not that love passes beyond containment into group love. And this
is the beginning of the greater reunions lifting toward the transcendental
states beyond our conceiving.

How can we know that such states exist? Because flashes of this higher
consciousness have always come down to us, transmitted to those advanced
persons who are open to receive them. Cosmic consciousness, the direct,
existential knowledge ofthe Divine inclusiveness and bliss of realized
union, has consistently descended upon advanced men and women over the
centuries. The mystical experience is of this nature. It is also the
experience of twinsoul lovers who, by the intensity of their reach, have
managed to break through into other dimensions and engage in ecstatic
communion while still in their physical bodies, perhaps thousands of
miles apart.

In all of this, evil as we know it is left behind. From the great
heights ofthe spirit, the diabolical force is seen for what it is --
a manifestation of cosmic darkness, which came into being with the first
stirring ofCreation. God willed that there be light, and light came forth
from the void, and darkness with it. This was the fundamental duality of
polar opposites, which existed thereafter on all planes below.
