---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 135-137
  Source:
    Title: Letters to Olga
By: Vaclav Havel
---
Dear Olga,

Birth from the maternal womb -- as the moment one sets out on one’s
journey through life -- presents a telling image of the initial condition
of humanity： a state of separation. Of release. Of breaking away. The
human race becomes distinct from the animal kingdom; a living cell comes
into being in a dead ocean; a planet that will one day be occupied by
man becomes self-sustaining： in these events can be read the history,
or the prehistory, of a constant, and constantly recurring, state of
separation. The idea that the human spirit and reason are constituted
by a severing of something from the hidden spirit and reason of Being is
one that is constantly occurring to us in one form or another, and at the
very least, it suggests that “separation” is a fundamental experience
that man has of himself and his existence in the world. With the advent
of Immunity, however, something intrinsically new has appeared, something
that ultimately is not referrable to anything else, something that is,
but is no longer spontaneously in “Being as such"; something that is,
but somehow "otherwise," that stands against everything, even against
itself. The miracle of the subject is born. The secret of the "I." The
awareness of self. The awareness of the world. The mystery of freedom and
responsibility. Man as a being that has fallen out of Being and therefore
continually reaches toward it, as the only entity by which and to which
Being has revealed itself as a question, as a secret and as meaning.

It seems to me that the notion of sepa ration as humanity's starting point
helps us establish our bearings when we explore the stage on which human
existence is constituted and its drama unfolded.

Separation creates a deeply contradictory situation： man is not what he
has set out into, or rather, he is not his experience of what he has set out
into. To him, this terrain-- the world -- is an alien land. Every step of
the way, he comes up against his own “otherness” in the world and his
otherness vis-a‘-vis himself. This terrain is essentially unintelligible
to man. He feels unsettled and threatened by it. We experience the world
as something not our own, something from which meaning must first be
wrested and which, on the contrary, is constantly taking meaning away
from us. No longer protected and hidden by spontaneous, unseparated
participation in Being, we are exposed to what Being, for us, has become
by virtue ofour separation -- the world of existing entities. Exposed
and vulnerable to it. ()n the other hand, we are no longer what we have
become separated from, either： we lose the certitude of Being, of our
former rootedness in its integrity, totality, and universality, of our
involvement in its general "identity." In other words, we are no longer
identical with Being. We do not experience it simply, from “inside,”
but only as our own alienation from it. The certitude of our being in
Being has irredeemably become a thing of the past, clouds have darkened the
sky and we are flung into the uncertainty of the world. A recollection of
this past, its birthmark and the ineradicable seal of our origins in it
go with us every step we take. But even that, to a considerable extent,
is alienated from us (ifonly because we reflect upon it) and as such,
it is in fact a part of what we have been thrown into or what we have
fallen into and what drives us -- in the alienness of the world -- into
situations we do not fully understand, which we suffer, but cannot avoid.

This inner echo of a home or a paradise forever lost to us-as a constitutive
part of our “I" -- defines the extent of what we are destined to lack
and what we therefore cannot help but reach toward： for does not the
hunger for meaning, for an answer to the question of what- in the process
of becoming ourselves -- We have become, derive from the recollection of
a separated being for its state of primordial being in Being? From the
other side, the alien world into which we are thrown beckons to us and
tempts us. On the one hand we are constantly exposed to the temptation
to stop asking questions and adapt ourselves to the world as it presents
itself to us, to sink into it, to forget ourselves in it, to lie our
way out of our selves and our “otherness" and thus to simplify our
existence-in-the-world. At the same time we are persuaded over and over
again that we can only reach toward meaning within the dimensions of this
world, as it lies before us, by being open to the opening out of meaning
within the world.

Thus is man alienated from Being, but precisely because of this he is seared
by longing for its intensity (which he understands as meaningfulness), by
a desire to merge with it and thus to transcend himself totally. As such,
however, he is also alienated from the world in which he finds himself,
a world that captivates and imprisons him. He is an alien in the world
because he is still somehow bound up in Being, and he is alienated from
Being because he has been thrown into the world. His drama unfolds in
the rupture between his orientation “upward” and “backward” and a
constant falling “downward” and into “now.” He is surrounded by the
horizon of the world, from which there is no escape, and at the same time,
consumed by a longing to break through this horizon and step beyond it.

The absurdity of being at the intersection of this dual state of
“thrownness," or rather this dual expulsion, can understandably give a
person a reason (or an excuse) for giving up. He may also, however, accept
it as a unique challenge enjoined upon his freedom, a challenge to set out
-- by virtue of all his thrownnesses -- on a multisignificational journey
between Being and the world (and thus, at the same time, to establish
the outlines of his identity); to undertake it, aware that his goal lies
beyond his field of vision, but also that precisely and only that fact
can reveal the journey, make it possible and ultimately give it meaning;
to fulfill uniquely the enigmatic mission of humanity in the history of
Being by submitting to his destiny in an authentic, thoughtful way, a way
that is faithful to everything originally good and therefore effective,
and to make this entirely lucid acceptance of his entirely obscure task
a source of sage delight to him.

I kiss you,

Vasek
