---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 44-45
  Source:
    Title: The Stormy Search for the Self
By:
  - Stanislav Grof
  - Christina Grof
References:
  - 3ea9e5e5-016a-40af-9cf9-5510391227eb
---
Sometimes the process of spiritual awakening is so subtle and gradual
that it is almost imperceptible. After a period of months or years,
a person looks back and notices that there has been a profound shift in
his or her understanding of the world, values, ethical standards, and life
strategies. This change might start by reading a book that contains a message
so clear and convincing that it is impossible to ignore. One is left with a
longing to know and experience more; then, coincidentally, the author comes
to town to give a lecture. This leads to associations with other people who
share this excitement, to the discovery of other books, and to attending
additional lectures and workshops. The spiritual journey has begun!

At other times, spiritual awareness enters one’s life in the form of a
deeper and changed perception of certain situations of everyday life. A
person might walk into the cathedral in Chartres with a tour group and,
completely unexpectedly, feel overwhelmed by the choir and the organ music,
by the play of light in the stained-glass windows, and by the grandeur of the
Gothic arches. The memory ofthis rapture and the sense of being connected
with something greater than oneself remains. Similar transformations of
perception have occurred in people during a raft trip through the majestic
beauty of the Grand Canyon or in some other stunning natural setting. For
many, the entry into the transcendental domain has been opened by art.

None of these individuals will ever again think of themselves as completely
separate. They all have had vivid and convincing experiences that transported
them beyond the restrictions of their physical bodies and limited self-concept
to a connection with something outside of themselves.

When spiritual emergence is very rapid and dramatic, however, this natural
process can become a crisis, and spiritual emergence becomes spiritual
emergency. People who are in such a crisis are bombarded with inner
experiences that abruptly challenge their old beliefs and ways ofexisting,
and their relationship with reality shifts very rapidly. Suddenly they feel
uncomfortable in the formerly familiar world and may find it difficult to meet
the demands of everyday life. They can have great problems distinguishing their
inner visionary world from the external world of daily reality. Physically,
they may experience forceful energies streaming through their bodies and
causing uncontrollable tremors.

Fearful and resistant, they might spend much time and effort trying to control
what feels like an overwhelming inner event. And they may feel impelled to
talk about their experiences and insights to anyone who is within range,
sounding out of touch with reality, disjointed, or messianic. However, when
offered understanding and guidance, they are usually cooperative and grateful
to have someone with whom they can share their journey. The basic criteria
for assessing when spiritual emergence has become a crisis are summarized
in table I.
