---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 912-913
Tags:
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Inscrutability
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=Purity, Simplicity, Wholeness
  - =Colophon=Invocation
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=Mâyâ and Magic
  - Life-Love=Love=Via Amoris
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Doctrinal Explanations of Evil
By: Sri Ramana Maharshi
---
One should not be deceived by the external appearance of a jnâni. ... Although
a jivanmukta (one having complete realization in this life) associated
with body may, owing to his prârabdha (past karma), appear to lapse into
ignorance or wisdom, yet he is only pure like the ether (âkâsa) which is
always itself clear, whether covered by dense clouds or cleared of clouds by
currents of air. ... Though he remains silent like one devoid of learning,
yet his suppineness is due to the implicit duality of the vaikhari vâk
(spoken words) of the Vedas; his silence is the highest expression of the
realised non-duality which is after all the true content of the Vedas. Though
he instructs his disciples, yet he does not pose as a teacher in the full
conviction that the teacher and disciple are mere conventions born of illusion
(mâyâ); ... if on the other hand he mutters words incoherently like a
lunatic, it is because his experience is inexpressible like the words of
lovers in embrace. If his words are many and fluent like those of an orator,
they represent the recollection of his experience, since he is the unmoving
non-dual One without any desire awaiting fulfilment. Although he may appear
grief-stricken like any other man in bereavement, yet he evinces just the
right love of and pity for the senses which he earlier controlled before he
realised that they were mere instruments and manifestations of the Supreme
Being. When he seems keenly interested in the wonders of the world, he is only
ridiculing the ignorance born of superimposition. If he appears indulging in
sexual pleasures, he must be taken to enjoy the ever-inherent Bliss of the
Self, which divided Itself into the individual self and the Universal Self
(and) delights in their reunion to regain Its original Nature. If he appears
wrathful he means well to the offenders. All his actions should be taken
to be only divine manifestations on the plane of humanity. There should not
arise even the least doubt as to his being emancipated while yet alive. He
lives only for the good of the world.
