---
Source:
  ID: 8147df67-439b-4909-bfe3-d55b944af666
Format: Verse
By: 6e692c9a-52ef-49c0-a8c5-4ab5e733a7cd
Title: The Truth Is, I Have Been Covering Your Butt
Description: July 8-10
---
The truth is, I have been covering your butt, God, for quite a while now in
 various ways
by not telling the world how you really are behind that eloquent pose most holy
 books are sporting of you.
This morning, though, it occurred to me to just speak my mind, to just be
 forthright,
and get all my complaints out there in the open so that we might have some kind
 of public forum if you felt brave enough.
Are you ready? Okay then!
Here is one of my major gripes： Why would anyone ever have to do anything to
 be let back into their own house,
especially if it were cold outside and they were shivering
and they were hungry too, and there was lots of fresh warm food inside?
Another way of putting that is, if someone were walking in front of me and
unknowingly dropped something precious, something of extraordinary value,

What kind of person would I be if I did not run as quickly as I could and pick
 that up
and use all my strength to protect and safeguard it until I could return it?
Return it, if possible, without the person having a moment, a moment of worry
 or
pain with the thought of it being lost.
I have fallen out of my own pocket. My own pocket being you, Beloved.
Millions like me cry at night because something is so deeply amiss.
The agony of separation you have caused us to endure.
You follow our every step, dear God; you saw what happened to us,
severed in a way from the infinite soul we became when we lost the knowledge
 you, my Lord, have.
Why, why, why? Why, why, why are you not running toward us with all your might
returning to us our glory, our freedom -- which is beyond dispute ... our
 divine right?

I will tell you something about shame, God, if you want to know.
You are the only one who should ever feel that way, never us,
for you have stepped over a holy infant all alone, dying in the cold.
I could go on tearing you apart, as I should, but now I will give you a chance
 to speak, after this final thought：
We should stop making excuses for you, my strange Friend,
for how dare you make us beg for what you say is ours?
No wonder you so rarely show your face, acting as you do.
Still, is not all perfect, since all is in you? And what may appear, will that
 not in just a moment change, if you want.
Look, my love, I am back to covering your hiney again. What to say. Guess a
 friend does that.
