---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 328-330
  Source:
    Title: The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation
    Locus: Introduction
By: C. G. Jung
References:
  - By: Shakespeare
    Title: Hamlet
    Locus: II ii 245
  - The Tibetan Book of the Great Liberation
Commentary: |
  The teaching, that men should do unto others what they would that others
  should do unto them, is capable of misconstruction, or misapplication,
  notwithstanding that its intent is obviously right. For so long as men are
  fettered to the Sangxa'ra and misled by its delusive glamorous mirages,
  and thus in bondage to Ignorance, they are quite incapable ofknowing in
  what right action, either to themselves or to others, consists.
---
Good and Evil are the two-forked trunk of the Tree of Life, sprung from
a single Seed. Each fork alike has its support in the root-system of the
One Tree. The same sap flows to and nourishes both forks equally.

Or Good and Evil may be viewed as being like twins, offspring of one
Father-Mother. They are compensatory, the one to the other, like the
right and left ventricles ofthe heart. They are the two hands doing
the work ofthe Cosmic Body, the two feet by which humanity traverses
the Highway of Life leading to the City of Nz'rz/a'zza. If either be
amputated, there is crippling. Virtue ofitselfleads to good results,
vice to evil results. The Sage who knows both Good and Evil to be one
and inseparable is transcendent over both. It is only in the Sangsa'ra
that opposition is operative. In the Beyond-Nature, in the Voidness,
there is but the Unmodified, the Primordial, the Unformed, the Unmade,
the Unborn, the All-Embracing Womb whence comes forth into being the
manifested Universe. The Dharma, or the Supra-mundane Law of the Cosmos,
enthroned upon the Immutable Throne of Karma, crowned with the Double
Crown of the Two Opposites, holding the Sceptre of At-one-ment, robed
in the gold and purple robes oflustice, guides all sentient creatures to
Understanding and Wisdom by means of Good and Evil.

This Section, which is necessarily the longest and in some respects the
most important part of this Introduction, will be fittingly concluded by
summarizing in a tenfold category the essentialities of the moral standard
of the Oriental Sages, by which alone the Great Guru should be judged：

(1) Good and Evil, when viewed exoterically, are a duality, neither member
of which is conceivable or capable of mentally existing independently of
the other. Being thus inseparable, Good and Evil, when viewed esoterically,
are intrinsically a unity.

(2) A thing is considered to be either good or evil in accordance with the
mental state in which it is viewed, the state itself being determined by
racial, social, or religious environment and heredity. Otherwise stated,
as by Shakespeare, “there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking
makes it so.”*

(3) There being nothing which has other than an illusory existence in
the mundane mind, nothing can be said to be either good or evil per 56.

(4) Inasmuch as it is the motive and intent initiating an act which
determines its character, no act, in itself, can be either good or evil;
for the same act when performed independently by two persons, one with
altruistic the other with selfish motive and intent, becomes both good
and evil.

(5) There being nothing which is good parse or evil per 56’,
Good and Evil, like all dualities, are hallucinatory concepts of the
rangsa'rz‘cally constituted mind of their percipient. As such, like
the world of appearances (which is merely a conglomerate ofsangsa'ric
concepts), they have only a relative, not an absolute, or true, existence.

(6) Hence, doctrines concerning a state of absolute evil called Hell
and a state of absolute good called Heaven, being based entirely upon
sangsa'rz'cally born concepts, are also entirely relative and illusory;
Nz'rz/a‘zza is beyond good and evil.

(7) Accordingly, all standards ofmorality founded upon any such
doctrines are unstable; and, like the Sangrafia‘ itself, by which
they are circumscribed, from which they arise, and upon which they are
dependent for their illusoriness, they are ever-changing and transitory,
like the mundane mind of their creators and advocates, and, therefore,
unsatisfactory and unfixable.

(8) Not until mankind shall transcend dualism and phenomenal appearances,
and realize the natural at-one-ment of all living creatures, will they
be able to formulate a sound standard of morality.

(9) Such a standard will be based entirely, not partially, as are prevailing
standards of morality, upon worldwide Bod/zz'sattz/z'c altruism.

(10) Its Golden Rule may be stated thus： “Do unto others and to
yourself only that which fosters Divine Wisdom and will guide every
sentient being to the Bod/21' Path of transcendence over the Sangsa'm‘
and to the Final Goal of Deliverance from Ignorance.”
