---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Loss, Loneliness, and Grief
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 355-364
  Source:
    Title: Voices of Silence
By: Frank Bianco
References:
  - Title: The Hound of Heaven
    By: Francis Thompson
  - Title: Psalms
    Locus: 91
Format: mixed
---
\  I have fled you down the nights and days,
  down the labyrinth ways of my mind.
    - "The Hound of Heaven," Francis Thompson

Francis Thompson's poem, a favorite of mine since my freshman year in
college, had taken on a personal quality as I reached my late forties. I
was flagged by the notion that I was on the last leg of my life and had
yet to do something that could give it meaning. As my fiftieth birthday
approached, I had begun careening from one thing to another, always lured
by the possibility that the new path would be the answer, the direction
for which I seemed to be searching.

I never acknowledged the possibility that I might simply be scared by
the thought of dying. It was much easier to find fault with people and
circumstances I felt certain were shackling my potential, stifiing my
growth. I was " choking." I needed " air, space in which to grow."

I believed I had earned the opportunity. I had been the dutiful father,
husband, and loyal corporate executive. I had demonstrated further vigor
with a turn as an entrepreneur and had even rounded out my profile as the
ultimate sportsman, a superior competitive surf fisherman who could wrest
achievement from Mother I\. I.1'ttire's‘ grasp. I had even prayed at the
altar of psychoanalysis for five years and, freed from all my hang-ups,
I had finally sought fulfillment as a free-lance journalist.

At that point, there seemed to be only one obstacle remaining between me
and meaning. Though I could not have survived without my wife’s patience
and support (she went back to work when the struggling “artiste”
didn‘t earn enough to pay the mortgage), I began thinking that maybe
the problem was my marriage： that after twenty-eight years and five
children, it was time for a change -- the kind that many “sensible,
mature" adults seemed to be making.

That was as far as my script had taken me when it began to undergo changes
that were clearly beyond my control. The first of these took place early
Friday morning, 8 June 1984. At that particular moment in time, I was
busy being the dedicated professional. I had to take the quintessential
photograph of Monticello, Thomas Jefferson’s home, as it glistened in
the slanting rays ofa rising sun.

My wife, Marie, and I were both working on newspaper features and I was
convinced that sunrise would provide exceptional photographs of the home,
which stands on a Virginia mountaintop. Since the gates at the base of
the mountain didn't open until seven o’clock. I decided to get there
before dawn. I would hike to the top and begin to photograph while Marie
patiently waited in our van camper for the caretaker to open up.

Our work had earned us special permission to park in one of the four spaces
that were built into a shelf in front of the cottage/gift shop alongside
the mansion. The mountain dropped off, about twenty feet from that point to
the plateau where Jefferson had once farmed an experimental garden. That
is where a security guard found our camper. It had rolled away on its own
from the space where Marie had parked it. It had rolled until it went over
the edge of the shelf, tumbling until it came to rest in Jefferson's garden.

The fall bent the wheels, shattered all the windows, and crumpled every
side. The interior had undergone an implosion that heaped it with all the
equipment, cans, and clothing we had carefully squeezed into the van's
storage spaces. All of it was salted with broken glass.

As a tow truck took us and the sad-looking wreck into nearby
Charlottesville, Marie remarked, “This has to be the worst day of my
life." We also realized it could have been her last. After she parked
that morning, she had altered her usual schedule and gone to see how I
was doing. She had foregone the luxury of staying inside the camper and
going back to sleep as she regularly did when I went out on an early
morning shoot.

Michael, the youngest ofour five children, was going to be disappointed,
I thought. I had promised that he and a high school buddy could take the
camper on a trip west after their high school graduation, which was just
two weeks away. The camper would not be making many -- if any -- more trips.

A few minutes before noon that day, Marie and I were sitting in the office
of an auto repair shop, making arrangements to fly home to Long Island. A
tall, well-built man in a shirt and tie walked in. The pistol holstered
on his hip caught my attention even before he asked if anyone knew where
he could find the owner of the wrecked camper resting outside. He was the
sheriff, he told me when I identified myself. “You have an emergency
back home,” he said. “It might be best if you called there immediately."

Emergency, I scoffed to myselfas I dialed. What could possibly be
worse than what had already happened? The phone only rang once before
twentyone-year-old Jimmy, the middle child of our three sons and two
daughters, answered. His “hello” was alarmingly solemn.

“Michael’s had an accident, Dad,” he said. “Is he okay?“ I asked,
halfhoping for confirmation. Jimmy paused for a long moment, and said,
“Dad,” before pausing again. He choked trying to repeat “Dad” and
began to cry, but not so much that I couldn’t hear him say, “We‘ve
lost him, Dad. Michael’s dead.”

Only part of me listened as Jimmy told me that Michael was apparently
headed back to our house during the break after his first early morning
class. For reasons that will never be known, his Volkswagen Beetle had
swerved on a curve and collided head-0n with a heavy equipment truck. He
had died instantly, at approximately 8：30 a, m., about an hour after
our camper had made its own final journey.

I remember putting my arms around Marie after I told her what had
happened. “Please stay close to me,” she said. " I really need you
now." I nod(led in assurance, but inside I wondered where the strength
would come from. I was already drowning in my own grief.

No one can ever be said to be ready for such a blow, but I could not have
been less prepared. Whereas Marie could find a measure of solace in her
faith, I had no such resource. Though I had been born and raised a Catholic
and had even studied for the priesthood, God had become another encumbrance
in my sophisticated search for fulfillment. At best I was an agnostic.

Michael‘s death got me off that fence. I blamed God for our son’s
death and I directed all my hurt and anger at him. What right did he have
to take my son? Michael was one of the most generous human beings I had
ever known, happiest when he could help someone, a gifted entertainer who
would do anything to bring a smile to an otherwise unhappy face. IfGod
needed to take somebody, why hadn’t it been one of the many useless
bastards who seemed to live off everybody's misery?

In those pain-filled first days, I could hardly restrain my anger when
well-meaning people tried to console me by explaining the “good”
reasons why God might have taken Michael, or how much better off he was
than the rest of us still living. I was not about to let God off the hook
that easily.

I had never hurt so badly. I saw reminders of Michael everywhere. But I drew
a blank every time I tried to recall him to mind. Loss is death's principle
trauma and I was terrified that mine seemed to be so total. Michael’s
living presence had been torn away and memories that might have consoled
me had disappeared. I could not believe God would be that cruel and I
became even more bitter.

Things were not much better a year later. Although the loss had made me
more appreciative of my wife and family, I still suffered amnesia so far as
any memory of Michael was concerned. Shortly after the first anniversary
of his death, Marie and I went south again to research assignments in
Bardstown, Kentucky. We considered it a bonus when we learned that a
Trappist abbey was only a few miles away from where we were working,
and that the monks produced food products to support themselves. That
sounded like a feature opportunity for Marie.

I had first learned about the Trappists when I was a Maryknoll Missionary
seminarian. The monks were the elite strike force in the spiritual life
-- penitents who never spoke, fasted, and chanted liturgy in a way that
evoked an angelic chorus.

They had swallowed a fellow seminarian who had slept on the bunk beneath
mine. Tom Barrett, who was probably the most outgoing member ofour class,
had vanished between the moment one bell rang for “lights out" and
another woke us the next morning.

“Hear about Barrett?“ a classmate had whispered, his voice mixing
awe and disbelief. “The Trappists. Can you believe it? Barrett, the guy
they must have vaccinated with a phonograph needle. Him, silent." He’ll
never last.“

Apparently, he hadn’t. The last I heard, he had stayed a few years and
then left. Another example of misplaced idealism. I thought, as Marie
and I parked our car by (：‘ethsemani’s front gate at about half
past five on a luly morning in 1985.

The monastery was very plain-looking, the kind ofarchitecture institutions
choose when utility is the only priority. White stuccoed walls met at a
wooden gate that was wide enough to drive a car through. The words par
z'ntrmztibus (peace to all who enter) were chiseled in the arch above
and formed a semicircle around a statue of the Virgin Mary standing in
a niche. The three-story quadrangle behind the wall replicated classic
monastic form that dated to the fifth century.

That fo‘rm positioned the abbey‘s church on the highest point ofland
on the north side of the quadrangle. Inside, Gethsemani’s founders had
deeply struck the mortar when they laid the bricks-- which they had first
made from clay at the site. That pattern gave a warm texture to walls
which might have otherwise appeared antiseptic beneath their stiff coat
of white paint.

The tapestry of white masonry peaked in a roof whose wooden buttresses
were about fifty feet above the floor. These seemed to sit atop the narrow
windows that had been slit into the walls, translucent fingers of stained
glass through which first and last light pierced the interior. The church
was not designed to be admired. It was a place where man could speak with
God, free from distractions.

There was a balcony across the rear, where guests attended the monastic
liturgy. A handful oflocals came faithfully, even at three in the morning,
when the monks chanted their first office of the day. Retreatants and
other more casual visitors used the same facility.

When Marie and I entered, about fifty white -- and black-robed monks
were already in their choir stalls directly below. Five minutes later,
they were standing, facing forward, when a knock signaled them to begin.

I do not recall particular words or phrases from the liturgy that
followed. I know I was struck by the monks’ genuine reverence. They
were not mouthing rituals. They were singing carefully, slowly, as one
disciplined voice. They were talking to someone. I did not doubt that
any more than I would doubt the presence ofa catcher ifI were watching
a pitcher winding up.

I glanced around the church, looking for that catcher. But the tabernacle
was not glowing. Nor was the crucifix over the altar moving. And
the light streaming through the stained-glass windows did not alter a
bit. No. CVt‘rything was perfectly normal. With one exception. For the
first time since ht had died, memories of Michael began to flood my mind.

I could see him vividly. A happy smile wreathed his handsome face. I could
actually hear him. “Dad, it's UK. It's me, Mikey." He was so real. So
alive. I reached out, just to hold him, just once more. And then I began
to cry because I knew I couldn’t. Not ever again.

The experience absorbed me completely for however long it took the monks
to finish their office and celebrate mass, a bit more than an hour. As
they disappeared into the Cloister, Michael and his memory seemed to go
with them, leaving me heartsick, alone again with my loss.

During the summer months that followed, I received additional newspaper
and magazine assignments that required me to visit two other Trappist
monasteries to do research and take photographs. Each time, the experience
was the same. My memory of Michael would be restored from the moment I
entered any church where Trappist monks were praying. I could remember
him until they had finished. Then a curtain would fall.

God seemed to be tantalizing me, holding my memories hostage. I resented
being forced to go to church. But, strangely, I found myself growing
envious of the monks, who, like Marie, drew obvious nourishment from a
faith I had once shared. I began to feel confused. Michael’s death was
no less a painful mystery for which I still held God responsible. But
why could I only remember my dead son in circumstances that I believed
had nothing whatsoever to do with him?

My involvement with Trappists did not end when I finished the
assignments. On the contrary, the subject had aroused an editor‘s interest
in a possible book. But in order to write a proposal, I would have to spend
some time actually living among the Trappists and following their routine.

I arranged to spend a week living at Holy Cross Abbey in Berryville,
Virginia. I had mixed feelings about the visit. On the one hand, I was
curious to get to know the monks and to learn about their way of life. On
the other, I was uneasy.

I was a Catholic in name only. Given my antipathy and alienation, how
could I go through the motions of worship -- which I felt was necessary
ifI was to learn firsthand about the monks? Besides, all my previous
visits had been brief and I had only been an observer. What would happen
when I remained for a lengthy period oftime and began to participate in
the routine that had been so powerful a trigger for my emotions?

I was quite nervous when, on the first evening of my visit, I joined the
monks as they sang the prayers and psalms for vespers at 5：30 P. M. When
they came to the Lord‘s Prayer, I went no further than the first two
words before my lips froze. I would not acknowledge as my Father, the
agent ofmy son’s death. I wanted no bread, needed no forgiveness, and
swore against doing the will ofa God who had put a knife in my heart. I
stood stiffly, anger chilling any appreciation I might have had for the
prayers the monks recited with obvious feeling and sincerity.

In the period alter vespers, the monks go individually to the refectory
for a light supper, usually fruit augmented by the leftovers from lunch,
their principal meal ofthe day. My insides were so knotted that I could not
think oflo‘od. I wanted to leave by morning and began planning to do so.

First, though, I would have to get through compline, the final choir
office of the day, at 7：50 RM. The church was dimly lit as the monks
began reciting the prayers by heart. They moved slowly through Psalm four,
which cites God‘s love for the steadfast heart, and then to Psalm number
ninety. When I heard the words, my bitterness dissolved into tears. Psalm
ninety is the substance of “On Eagle’s Wings." the hymn that was sung
at Michael's funeral mass.

The words forced me back to that moment. Marie was kneeling next
to me in the front pew. All that remained of our youngest son lay
uncharacteristically still in the aisle in front of us, sealed forever
in a polished wooden coffin. Ifl put my arm out, I could have touched it.

“You who dwell in the shelter of the Lord,” the hymn promised,

  who abide in his shadow for life.
  Say to the Lord, my refuge, my rock in whom I trust.
  And He will raise you up on eagle's wings.
  Bear you on the breath of dawn.
  Make you to shine like the sun,
  and hold you in the palm of his hand.

The words were a mockery. Michael’s coffin, so close, so frighteningly
final, was by no means the wings of eagles. I had watched his two brothers,
tears streaming down their faces, help carry it into the church. It was
their hands and their hearts that were visible. I saw nothing of God's
palm. I didn't want to see him anywhere near that box.

As that scene flickered through my mind, reopening painful memories, I
began to pray. “Please,” I pleaded, “don’t make me cry in front
ofthese people. Why are you doing this to me? You took my son. Isn’t
that enough? Leave me alone. Please, go away. What have I done to make
you want to hurt me like thisrw Even ifI wanted to sing with the monks,
I couldn’t. I had all to do to keep from sobbing aloud.

I don’t remember anything until the monks stopped singing and silence
brought me back to the moment at hand. All lights had been turned off,
save for a single spot that illuminated a statUe of the Virgin Mary in
a niche above the main altar.

Turning in their stalls, the monks faced the statue and began to sing the
Salve Regina, as monks have done every eyening since the \ l’lld(ll€
Ages. They called on \ ylarv, “our advocate... our queen ... our life,
our sweetness, and our hope. To you do we send up our sights, mourning
and weeping in this vale oftears."

I felt tears on my face as I listened, recognizing the bond I shared with
that poor woman. The pain that \ r-Iichelangelo had carved into the Pietu‘
was knifing into my heart. I knew how Mary must have felt when they took
the broken body of her son from the cross and laid him, lifeless, in her
arms. Sweet Mother ofGod, I said to myself without thinking, how I know.

The notes ot‘the hymn ranged high, yet there was no audible straining as
the two choirs, one soft voice, easily scaled the register, holding notes,
caressing words, polishing the phrases of petition. Their tenderness had the
special quality love acquires when strong men expose their vulnerability by
its confession. They ended their goodnight gently, crooning its last words,
" O, clement. Oi, loving. 0, sweet Virgin Mary."

The monastery bell began slowly tolling the angelus as they finished and
stood silently, heads bowed. The clanging quickened and the monks beckoned
to me to join them as they filed from the stalls and walked in two lines
to a point where the abbot stood with a holy-water sprinkler. Each monk
came before him, bowed, and was sprinkled with the water before leaving
the church. In a minute or two, the ceremony was over and I found myself
standing outside in the Cloister.

As the monks walked by me on their way to their rooms, I was startled to
hear my name whispered. Turning around, I came face to face with my old
seminary classmate, Tom Barrett, now known as Father Daniel. He was thinner
than he had been when he had once emphatically dumped me with a cross-body
block during a football game. But I felt the raw strength in the arm he
threw around my shoulders, as be squeezed and half-carried me along into
the preau, a small garden that formed the core ofthe monastery quadrangle.

He responded immediately to my shaken appearance and asked what was the
matter. The pain pushed aside any bravado and in a rush I told him about
Viiichael's death, the experiences I'd had in other abbeys, and what had
just taken place inside the church. Tom had been standing in front of
me with his arms folded, listening. When I finished, he nodded and said,
" He‘s after you." Then, nodding again, as though saying the words had
made him more certain of his conclusion, be repeated, “He’s after
you." I said nothing in reply. The thought made me sick. To‘m continued,
explaining how he believed God never stops trying to draw us close to him.

“If we resist," he said, " he finds ways to get through our
barriers. I‘m positive he‘s reacl’ting out to you, and your
experience just now is an example. I’m just as certain that your continued
IHVOIVCINCHI with us is no coincidence. I think he brought you here for
a very special rea'son."

I remained silent at first, even though I was tempted to tell Tom that
if God was trying to reach me, I was not interested. While I was glad to
regain access to my memories of Michael, they did not offset his loss. That
thought finally overrode any desire I had to be polite and I blurted out,
“Screw the sadistic son of‘a bitch. If he really did care about me,
then why did he take my son ? "

“He didn’t take your son,” Tom answered very calmly, “no more than
he could be blamed for your death if someone shot and killed you. That
tragedy would be the result ofwhatevcr reasons brought you and the gunman
to the same place and time.

“We’re not windup toys. We call the shots. Not God. He offers us
options, opportunities-graces, as we call them--to grow into the unique
individuals he created us to be. But we call the shots. Did you forget your
Baltimore catechism? Remember what it gave as the reason for our creation?

“‘God made us to know him, to love him and to serve him in this world
and so earn happiness in the next.’ You can‘t love under duress. To
love is to choose, and to choose, you must have free will.”

Tom‘s logic left me nothing to say. He was right. God was no more the
agent of Michael’s death than I was. Michael had chosen to be driving
that road at the moment when something caused his car to veer into that
particular truck’s path. Had the truck come one minute sooner or later ...
had the drivers stopped for coffee ... or skipped a break ... the
accident might never have happened.

I needed to think, I told Tom, who then nodded in the direction of the
church. As I began walking toward it, he called softly, and when I turned,
he came over to me, hugged me tightly and said, “I’m so sorry, old
buddy. Look, take it easy in there. Give God a chance. Listen. I think
that’s what’s most important now. Just listen."

God did not kill my son, I thought as I sat in the church. Then
ifthere is a God, I asked, where did he fit in all of this? Something
told me, “love.” That was God's most dominant characteristic, an
all-encompassing, unqualified love-- one that included every possible
variety and expression.

If that was true, then God had to “feel” the love I had for Michael. It
had to be part of his experience. And he had to know my pain. He knew
it as intensely as he knew the loss of love that caused it. If he did,
he had to feel as badly as any friend. At least that much. He had been
as much a part of Michael’s creation as had Marie and I. He knew the
joy that had been Michael. The pain had to cut him deeply. As deeply
as it did me. He had to be grieving my -- our -- loss, sorrox-ving as
Christ’s own mother must have sorrowed.

All this was happening in minutes, one thought after another, pulling
and then sweeping me along. The God I had reviled and rejected had been
waiting to mourn with me, burdened with sorrow he would share with me. I
felt so ashamed. I had been so wrong, for so long. Yet God had never
given up on me. The Hound of Heaven had kept following me, his arms open,
no matter what I had said or done.

Then, without warning, the experience of Michael‘s death began to replay
in my mind, but as though for the first time. I could sense it surging up
inside me, a mass of agony and pain, and I wanted to get up and run. But
something told me there was no need to be afraid. I heard the words,
“I know. I know. As you did, as you still do, I love him too. I know."

I stayed put, weeping, as the pain poured out. But not alone. Not
unconsoled. This time I wept in the arms of my God, whom I finally allowed
to hold me in that monastery church.

And so, I stopped running. God had finally brought me to ground in the
silence ofTrappists and I knew it was there I had to listen.
