---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 367
  Source:
    Title: Theologia Germanica
    Locus: XI
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Know Thyself
  - Sacrifice-Death=Separation-Sin=Anatomy of the Fallen State
  - Sacrifice-Death=Humility=Contrition
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=Steadfastness
  - Sacrifice-Death=Volition, Obedience and Conformity=Intention
---
Christ’s soul must needs descend into hell, before it ascended into
heaven. So must also the soul of man. But mark ye in what manner this
cometh to pass. When a man truly perceiveth and considereth himself,
who and what he is. and findeth himself utterly vile and wicked, and
unworthy of all the comfort and kindness that he hath ever received
from God. or from the creatures, he falleth into such a deep abasement
and despising of himself, that he thinketh himself unworthy that the
earth should bear him. and it seemeth to him reasonable that all
creatures in heaven and earth should rise up against him and avenge
their Creator on him. and should punish and torment him; and that he
were unworthy even of that. And it seemeth to him that he shall be
eternally lost and damned, and a footstool to all the devils in hell,
and that this is right and just and all too little compared to his
sins which he so often and in so many ways hath committed against God
his Creator. ...  Whilst a man is thus in hell, none may console him.
neither God nor the creature, as it is written. ‘In hell there is no
redemption.' ...

Now God hath not forsaken a man in this hell, but He is laying his
hand upon him, that the man may not desire nor regard anything but the
Eternal Good only, and may come to know that that is so noble and
passing good, that none can search out or express its bliss,
consolation and joy. peace, rest and satisfaction. And then, when the
man neither careth for.  nor seeketh. nor desireth, anything but the
Eternal Good alone, and seeketh not himself, nor his own things, but
the honour of God only, he is made a partaker of all manner of joy.
bliss, peace, rest and consolation, and so the man is henceforth in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

This hell and this heaven are two good, safe ways for a man in this
present time, and happy is he who truly findeth them.

For this hell shall pass away.

But Heaven shall endure for aye.
