---
Tags:
  - The Quest=The Fire Beyond the Tomb - Contemplating God, Faith, and Truth
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 7-8
  Source:
    Title: On God
By: J. Krishnamurti
---
Can you think about God? Can you be convinced about the existence of God
because you have read all the evidence? The atheist also has his evidence;
he has probably studied as much as you, and he says there is no God. You
believe that there is God, and he believes that there is not; both of you have
beliefs, both of you spend your time thinking about God. But before you think
about something that you do not know, you must find out what thinking is,
must you not? How can you think about something that you do not know? You
may have read the Bible, the Bhagavad Gita, or other books in which various
erudite scholars have skilfully described what God is, asserting this and
contradicting that, but as long as you do not know the process of your own
thinking, what you think about God may be stupid and petty, and generally
it is. You may collect a lot of evidence for the existence of God and write
very clever articles about it, but surely the first question is, how do you
know what you think is true? Can thinking ever bring about the experience
of that which is unknowable? Which doesn’t mean that you must emotionally,
sentimentally accept some rubbish about God.

So is it not important to find out whether your mind is conditioned, rather
than to seek that which is unconditioned? Surely if your mind is conditioned,
which it is, however much it may inquire into the reality of God, it can
only gather knowledge or information according to its conditioning. So your
thinking about God is an utter waste of time, it is a speculation that has
no value. It is like my sitting in this grove and wishing to be on the top
of that mountain [in the background]. If! really want to find out what is on
the top of the mountain and beyond, I must go to it. It is no good my sitting
here speculating, building temples, churches, and getting excited about them.
What I have to do is to stand up, walk, struggle, push, get there, and find
out; but as most of us are unwilling to do that, we are satisfied to sit here
and speculate about something that we do not know. And I say such speculation
is a hindrance, it is a deterioration of the mind, it has no value at all;
it only brings more confusion, more sorrow to man.

God is something that cannot be talked about, that cannot be described,
that cannot be put into words, because it must ever remain the unknown.
The moment the recognizing process takes place, you are back in the field
of memory. Do you understand? Say, for instance, you have a momentary
experience of something extraordinary. At that precise moment there is
no thinker who says, “I must remember it.“ There is only the state of
experiencing. But when that moment goes by, the process of recognition comes
into being. Please follow this. The mind says, “I have had a marvellous
experience and I wish I could have more ofit," so the struggle for the more
begins. The acquisitive instinct, the possessive pursuit of the more, comes
into being for various reasons： because it gives you pleasure, prestige,
knowledge, you become an authority, and all the rest of that nonsense.

The mind pursues that which it has experienced, but that which it has
experienced is already over, dead, gone. To discover that which is, the mind
must die to that which it has experienced. This is not something that can
be cultivated day after day, that can be gathered, accumulated, held, and
then talked and written about. All that we can do is to see that the mind
is conditioned and through self-knowledge to understand the process of our
own thinking. I must know myself, not as I would ideologically like to be,
but as I actually am, however ugly or beautiful, however jealous, envious,
acquisitive. But it is very difficult just to see what one is without
wishing to change it, and that very desire to change it is another form of
conditioning; and so we go on, moving from conditioning to conditioning,
never experiencing something beyond that which is limited.
