---
Tags:
  - Trials=Liberation
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 375-378
  Source:
    Title: Man's Search for Meaning
By: Viktor E. Frankl
References:
  - Title: Psalm
    Locus: 118:5
---
One day, a few days after the liberation, I walked through the country past
flowering meadows, for miles and miles, toward the market town near the
camp. Larks rose to the sky and I could hear their joyous song. There was
no one to be seen for miles around; there was nothing but the wide earth
and sky and the larks' jubilation and the freedom of space. I stopped,
looked around, and up to the sky -- and then I went down on my knees. At
that moment there was very little I knew of myself or of the world --
I had but one sentence in mind -- always the same： “I called to the
Lord from my narrow prison and He answered me in the freedom of space."

How long I knelt there and repeated this sentence memory can no longer
recall. But I know that on that day, in that hour, my new life started. Step
for step I progressed, until I again became a human being.

The way that led from the acute mental tension ofthe last days in camp
(from that war of nerves to mental peace) was certainly not free from
obstacles. It would be an error to think that a liberated prisoner was not
in need of spin‘tual care any more. We have to consider that a man who has
been under such enormous mental pressure for such a long time is naturally
in some danger after his liberation, especially since the pressure was
released quite suddenly. This danger (in the sense ofpsychological hygiene)
is the psychological counterpart of the bends. Just as the physical health
of the caisson worker would be endangered if he left his diver’s chamber
suddenly (where he is under enormous atmospheric pressure), so the man
who has suddenly been liberated from mental pressure can suffer damage
to his moral and spiritual health.

During this psychological phase one observed that people with natures of
a more primitive kind could not escape the influences of the brutality
which had surrounded them in camp life. Now, being free, they thought
they could use their freedom licentiously and ruthlessly. The only
thing that had changed for them was that they were now the oppressors
instead of the oppressed. They became instigators, not objects, of willful
force and injustice. They justified their behavior by their own terrible
experiences. This was often revealed in apparently insignificant events. A
friend was walking across a field with me toward the camp when suddenly we
came to a field of green crops. Automatically, I avoided it, but he drew
his arm through mine and dragged me through it. I stammered something
about not treading down the young crops. He became annoyed, gave me an
angry look and shouted, “You don’t say! And hasn’t enough been taken
from us? My wife and child have been gassed -- not to mention everything
else -- and you would forbid me to tread on a few stalks of oats!”

Only slowly could these men be guided back to the commonplace truth that no
one has the right to do wrong, not even if wrong has been done to them. We
had to strive to lead them back to this truth, or the consequences would
have been much worse than the loss ofa few thousand stalks of oats. I can
still see the prisoner who rolled up his shirt sleeves, thrust his right
hand under my nose and shouted, “May this hand be cut off ifI don’t
stain it with blood on the day when I get home! ” I want to emphasize
that the man who said these words was not a bad fellow. He had been the
best ofcomrades in camp and afterwards.

Apart from the moral deformity resulting from the sudden release of mental
pressure, there were two other fundamental experiences which threatened
to damage the character of the liberated prisoner： bitterness and
disillusionment when he returned to his former life.

Bitterness was caused by a number of things he came up against in his
former home town. When, on his return, a man found that in many places he
was met only with a shrug of the shoulders and with hackneyed phrases,
he tended to become bitter and to ask himself why he had gone through
all that he had. When he heard the same phrases nearly everywhere-“We
did not know about it,” and “We, too, have suffered,” then he asked
himself, have they really nothing better to say to me?

The experience ofdisillusionment is different. Here it was not one’s
fellow man (whose superficiality and lack of feeling was so disgusting
that one finally felt like creeping into a hole and neither hearing nor
seeing human beings any more) but fate itself which seemed so cruel. A
man who for years had thought he had reached the absolute limit of all
possible suffering now found that suffering has no limits, and that he
could suffer still more, and still more intensely.

When we spoke about attempts to give a man in camp mental courage, we said
that he had to be shown something to look forward to in the future. He had
to be reminded that life still waited for him, that a human being waited
for his return. But after liberation? There were some men who found that
no one awaited them. Woe to him who found that the person whose memory
alone had given him courage in camp did not exist any more.' Woe to him
who, when the day of his dreams finally came, found it so different from
all he had longed for! Perhaps he boarded a trolley, traveled out to the
home which he had seen for years in his mind, and only in his mind, and
pressed the bell, just as he has longed to do in thousands of dreams,
only to find that the person who should open the door was not there,
and would never be there again.

We all said to each other in camp that there could be no earthly happiness
which could compensate for all we had suffered. We were not hoping for
happiness -- it was not that which gave us courage and gave meaning to
our suffering, our sacrifices and our dying. And yet we were not prepared
for unhappiness. This disillusionment, which awaited not a small number of
prisoners, was an experience which these men have found very hard to get
over and which, for a psychiatrist, is also very difficult to help them
overcome. But this must not be a discouragement to him; on the contrary,
it should provide an added stimulus.

But for every one ofthe liberated prisoners, the day comes when, looking
back on his camp experiences, he can no longer understand how he endured
it all. As the day of his liberation eventually came, when everything
seemed to him like a beautiful dream, so also the day comes when all his
camp experiences seem to him nothing but a nightmare.

The crowning experience ofall, for the homecoming man, Is the wonderful
feeling that, after all he has suffered, there is nothing he need fear
any more -- except his God.
