---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 524-525
Tags:
  - Life-Love=Prayer-Meditation-Contemplation=On Meditation and Contemplation
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=Materia Prima and Human Perfection
  - Life-Love=Prayer-Meditation-Contemplation=On Concentration
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=The Eternally Awake
  - Beauty-Peace=Beauty=The Doctrine of the Archetypes
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Know Thyself
  - Discernment-Truth=The Void=Solitude
By: Eckhart
---
When one takes God as he is divine, having the reality of God within
him, God sheds light on everything. Everything will taste like God
and reflect him. God will shine in him all the time. He will have the
disinterest, renunciation, and spiritual vision of his beloved,
ever-present Lord. He will be like one athirst with a real thirst; he
cannot help drinking even though he thinks of other things. Wherever
he is, with whomsoever he may be, whatever his purpose or thoughts or
occupation -- the idea of the Drink will not depart as long as the
thirst endures; and the greater the thirst the more lively,
deep-seated, present, and steady the idea of the Drink will be. Or
suppose one loves something with all that is in him. so that nothing
else can move him or give pleasure, and he cares for that alone,
looking for nothing more; then wherever he is or with whomsoever he
may be. whatever he tries or does, that Something he loves will not
be extinguished from his mind. He will see it everywhere, and the
stronger his love grows for it the more vivid it will be. A person
like this never thinks of resting because he is never tired.

The more he regards everything as divine -- more divine than it is of
itself -- the more God will be pleased with him. To be sure, this
requires effort and love, a careful cultivation of the spiritual
life, and a watchful, honest, active oversight of all one’s mental
attitudes toward things and people. It is not to be learned by
world-flight. running away from things, turning solitary and going
apart from the world. Rather, one must learn an inner solitude.
wherever or with whomsoever he may be. He must learn to penetrate
things and find God there, to get a strong impression of God firmly
fixed in his mind.
