---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 941-942
Tags:
  - 941
Commentary: |
  [The Castle is] equatable esoterically with the Âjnâ-chakra, or sixth center
  in the practice of Kundatini, as the editor points out. But that the meaning
  is to be taken literally first of all is proven in the paragraph following,
  where a discussion ensues between a farmer and his son while the Kargyiitpa
  saint is flying overhead： "The father said. "What is there to marvel at or
  to be amused about in the sight? One Nyang-Tsa-Kargyen, a very mischievous
  woman, had a wicked son, named Mila (Milarepa had practiced black magic in
  his youth before taking up the spiritual life). It is that good-for-nothing
  starveling. Move aside and do not allow his shadow to fall over thee, and go
  on leading the team." The father himself was bending his body about so as to
  avoid falling under my shadow. But the son said. "If a man be able to fly. I
  do not mind his being a good-for-nothing person： there can be nothing more
  wonderful than a man flying." So saying, he continued looking at me.'
By: Milarepa
---
I zealously persevered in my meditations. At last. I began to feel that I
had obtained the power of transforming myself into any shape (desired), and
of flying through the air. By day. I thus felt that I could exercise endless
phenomenal powers; by night, in my dreams. I could traverse the universe in
every direction unimpededly-from the summit of Mount Meru to its base --
and I saw everything clearly (as I went). Likewise (in my dreams) I could
multiply myself into hundreds of personalities, all endued with the same powers
as myself. Each of my multiplied forms could traverse space and go to some
Buddha Heaven, listen to the Teachings there, and then come back and preach
the Dharma to many persons. I could also transform my physical body into a
blazing mass of fire, or into an expanse of flowing or calm water. Seeing
that I had obtained infinite phenomenal powers (even though it be but in my
dreams). I was filled with happiness and encouragement at mine own success.

Thenceforth, I persevered in my devotions in a most joyous mood,
until, finally. I actually could fly. Sometimes I flew over to the
Min-khyiit-Dribma-Dzong (Castle lying in Shadows to the Eyebrows) to meditate;
and there I obtained a far greater development of the Vital Warmth than ever
before. Sometimes I flew back again to the Dragkar-Taso Cave.
