---
By: Count Leo Nikolaevich Tolstoy
Source:
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Locus:
    Description: Judgement
    Hexagram: "2 - \u4DC1 - K'un"
    Page: 20-21
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
---
What tormented Ivan Ilych most was the deception, the lie, which for some
reason they all accepted, that he was not dying, but was simply ill, and that
he only need keep quiet and undergo a treatment and then something very good
will result. He however knew that do what they would nothing would come of it,
only still more agonizing suffering and death. This deception tortured him --
their not wishing to admit what they all knew and what he knew, but wanting
to lie to him conceming his terrible condition, and wishing and forcing him
to participate in that lie. Those lies -- lies enacted over him on the eve
of his death and destined to degrade this awful, solemn act to the level of
their visitings, their curtains, their sturgeon for dinner -- were a terrible
agony for Ivan Ilych. And strangely enough, many times when they were going
through their antics over him he had been within a hairbreadth of calling
out to them, "Stop lying! You know and I know that lam dying. Then at least
stop lying about it!" But he had never had the spirit to do it. The awful,
terrible act of his dying was, he could see, reduced by those about him to the
level of a casual, unpleasant, and almost indecorous incident (as if someone
entered a drawing-room diffusing an unpleasant odor) and this was done by
that very decorum which he had served all his life long. He saw that no one
felt for him, because no one even wished to grasp his position. Only Cerasim
recognized it and pitied him. And so Ivan Ilych felt at ease with him. He
felt comforted when Gerasim supported his legs (sometimes all night long)
and refused to go to bed saying： "Don't you worry, Ivan Ilych. I'll get
sleep enough later on," or when he suddenly became familiar and exclaimed：
"If you weren't sick it would be another matter, but as it is, why should I
grudge a little trouble?" Gerasim alone did not lie; everything showed that
he alone understood the facts of the case and did not consider it necessary
to disguise them, but simply felt sorry for his emaciated and ent'eebled
master. Once when Ivan Ilych was sending him away he even said straight out：
"We all of us die, so why should I grudge a little trouble?" -- expressing
the fact that he did not think his work burdensome, because he was doing it
for a dying man and hoped someone would do the same for him when his time came.
