---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Consciousness, Transcendence
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 186-191
  Source:
    Title: The Stormy Search for the Self
    By:
      - Stanislav Grof
      - Christina Grof
By: Stanislav Grof
Title: God in the Laboratory - Stanislav's Story
---
My first LSD session was an event that has in its consequences profoundly
changed my professional and personal life. I experienced an extraordinary
encounter and confrontation with my unconscious psyche, which instantly
overshadowed my previous interest in Freudian psychoanalysis. This day
marked the beginning of my radical departure from traditional thinking in
psychiatry. I was treated to a fantastic display ofcolorful visions, some
of them abstract and geometrical, others figurative and full of symbolic
meaning. I also felt an amazing array ofemotions with an intensity I
did not know was possible. I could not believe how much I learned about
my psyche in those few hours. One aspect of my first session deserves
special notice, since its significance reached far beyond the level of
psychological insights： my preceptor at the faculty was very interested
in studying the electrical activity of the brain, and his favorite subject
was the exploration of the influence of various frequencies of flashing
light on the brain waves. I agreed to have my brain waves monitored by an
electroencephalograph as part of the experiment.

I was exposed to a strong stroboscopic light between the third and fourth
hour of my experience. At the scheduled time, a research assistant
appeared and took me to a small room. She carefully pasted electrodes
all over my scalp and asked me to lie down and close my eyes. Then she
placed a giant stroboscopic light above my head and turned it on.

At this time, the effects of the drug were culminating, and that immensely
enhanced the impact of the strobe. I was hit by a radiance that seemed
comparable to the epicenter of an atomic explosion, or possibly to the
light of supernatural brilliance that according to Oriental scriptures
appears to us at the moment of death. This thunderbolt catapulted me out
of my body. I lost first my awareness of the research assistant and the
laboratory, then the psychiatric clinic, then Prague, and finally the
planet. My consciousness expanded at an inconceivable speed and reached
cosmic dimensions.

As the young assistant gradually shifted the frequency of the strobe up
and down the scale, I found myself in the middle of a cosmic drama of
unimaginable proportions. I experienced the Big Bang, passed through black
and white holes in the universe, identified with exploding supernovas,
and witnessed many other strange phenomena that seemed to be pulsars,
quasars, and other amazing cosmic events.

There was no doubt that the experience I was having was very close to those
I knew from reading the great mystical scriptures of the world. Even though
my mind was deeply affected by the drug, I was able to see the irony and
paradox of the situation. The Divine manifested itselfand took me over
in a modern laboratory in the middle of a serious scientific experiment
conducted in a Communist country with a substance produced in the test
tube of a twentieth-century chemist.

I emerged from this experience touched to the core and immensely impressed
by its power. Not believing at that time, as I do today, that the potential
for a mystical experience is the natural birthright of all human beings,
I attributed everything to the effect of the drug. I felt strongly that
the study ofnonordinary states of mind in general, and those induced
by psychedelics in particular, was by far the most interesting area of
psychiatry and decided to make it my field of specialization.

I realized that, under the proper circumstances, psychedelic experiences --
to a much greater degree than dreams, which play such a crucial role in
psychoanalysis -- are truly, in Freud’s words, a “royal road into the
unconscious.” This powerful catalyst could help to heal the gap between
the great explanatory power of psychoanalysis and its lack of efficacy as a
therapeutic tool. I felt strongly that LSD-assisted analysis could deepen,
intensify, and accelerate the therapeutic process and produce practical
results matching the ingenuity of Freudian theoretical speculations.

Within weeks of my session, I joined a group of researchers comparing
the effects ofdifferent psychedelic substances with naturally occurring
psyChoses. As I was working with experimental subjects, I could not get
off my mind the idea of starting a project in which psychoactive drugs
could be used as catalysts for psychoanalysis.

My dream came true when I won a position at the newly founded Psychiatric
Research Institute in Prague. Its open-minded director appointed me
principal investigator of a clinical study exploring the therapeutic
potential of LSD psychotherapy. I initiated a research project using a
series of sessions with medium dosages in patients with various forms of
psychiatric disorders. On occasion, we included mental-health professionals,
artists, scientists, and philosophers who were interested and had serious
motivations for the experience, such as gaining a deeper understanding of
the human psyche, enhancement ofcreativity, or fai'cilitation ofproblem
solving. The repeated use of such sessions became popular among European
therapists under the name “psycholytic treatment"; its Greek roots
suggest a process of dissolving psychological conflicts and tensions.

I began a fantastic intellectual, philosophical, and spiritual
adventure that has now lasted more than three decades. During this
time, my worldview has been undermined and destroyed many times by
daily exposure to extraordinary observations and experiences. A most
remarkable transformation has happened as a result of my systematic study
of the psychedelic experiences of others as well as my own： under the
unrelenting influx ofincontrovertible evidence, my understanding of the
world has gradually shifted from an atheistic position to a basically
mystical one. What had been foreshadowed in a cataclysmic way by my first
experience of cosmic consciousness has been brought to full fruition by
careful daily work on the research data.

My initial approach to LSD psychotherapy was deeply influenced by the
Freudian model of the psyche, which is limited to postnatal life history
and the individual unconscious. Soon after I started working with different
categories of psychiatric patients using repeated sessions, it became
clear that such a conceptual framework was painfully narrow. While it
might be appropriate for some forms of verbal psychotherapy, it was
clearly inadequate for situations where the psyche was activated by
a powerful catalyst. As long as we used medium dosages, many of the
initial experiences of the series contained biographical material from
the individual’s infancy and childhood, as described by Freud. However,
when the sessions were continued, each of the clients moved sooner or
later into experiential realms that lay beyond this framework. When the
dosages were increased, the same thing happened, but much earlier.

Once the sessions reached this point, I started witnessing experiences
that were indistinguishable from those described in the ancient mystical
traditions and spiritual philosophies of the East. Some of them were powerful
sequences of psychological death and rebirth; others involved feelings
of oneness with humanity, nature, and the cosmos. Many clients also
reported visions ofdeities and demons from different cultures and visits
to various mythological realms. Among the most astonishing occurrences
were dramatic and vivid sequences that were subjectively experienced as
past-incarnation memories.

I was not prepared to observe such phenomena in psychotherapeutic
sessions. I knew about their existence from my studies of comparative
religion, but my psychiatric training had taught me to consider them
psychotic, not therapeutic. I was astonished by their emotional power,
authenticity, and transformative potential. Initially, I did not welcome
this unexpected development in my therapeutic venture. The intensity of the
emotional and physogical manifestations of these states was frightening,
and many of their aspects threatened to undermine my safe and reliable
worldview.

However, as my experience and familiarity with these extraordinary
phenomena increased, it became clear that they were normal and natural
manifestations of the deeper domains of the human psyche. Their emergence
from the unconscious followed upon the appearance of biographical material
from childhood and infancy, which traditional psychotherapy considers a
legitimate and desirable subject of exploration. Thus it would have been
highly artificial and arbitrary to view childhood memories as normal
and acceptable and attribute the experiences that followed them to a
pathological process.

When the nature and content of these recesses of the psyche were fully
revealed, they undoubtedly represented a significant source of difficult
emotional and physical feelings. In addition, when these sequences were
allowed to run their natural course, the therapeutic results transcended
anything I had ever witnessed. Difficult symptoms that had resisted
months and even years of conventional treatment often disappeared after
experiences such as psychological death and rebirth, feelings of cosmic
unity, and sequences that clients described as past-life memories.

My observations of others were in full agreement with those from my own
psychedelic sessions： many states that mainstream psychiatry considers
bizarre and incomprehensible are natural manifestations of the deep dynamics
of the human psyche. And their emergence into consciousness, traditionally
seen as a sign of mental illness, may actually be the organisms radical
effort to free itself from the effects of various traumas, simplify
its functioning, and heal itself. I realized that it was not up to us to
dictate what the human psyche should be like in order to fit our scientific
beliefs and worldview. Rather, it is important to discover and accept
the true nature of the psyche and find out how we can best cooperate with it.

I attempted to map the experiential territories that were made available
through the catalyzing action ofLSD. For several years, I dedicated all of
my time to psychedelic work with patients of various clinical diagnoses,
keeping detailed records of my own observations and collecting their own
descriptions of their sessions. I believed I was creating a new cartography
of the human psyche. However, when I completed a map of consciousness that
included the different types and levels of experiences I had observed in
psychedelic sessions, it dawned on me that it was new only from the point of
view ofWestern academic psychiatry. It became clear that I had rediscovered
what Aldous Huxley called “perennial philosophy," an understanding of the
universe and ofexistence that has emerged with some minor variations again
and again in different countries and historical periods. Similar maps have
sted in various cultures for centuries or even millennia. The different
systems of yoga, Buddhist teachings, the Tibetan Vajrayana, Kashmir Shaivism,
Taoism, Sufism, Kabbalah, and Christian mysticism are just a few examples,

The process I was witnessing in others and experiencing myself also
had a deep similarity with shamanic initiations, rites of passage of
various cultures, and the ancient mysteries of death and rebirth. Western
scientists had ridiculed and rejected these sophisticated procedures,
believing that they had successfully replaced them with rational and
scientifically sound approaches. My observations convinced me that such
modern fields as psychoanalysis and behaviorism had only scratched the
surface of the human psyche and could bear no comparison to the depth
and scope of such ancient knowledge.

In the early years of my research, I became enthusiastic about these
exciting new observations and made several attempts to discuss them with
my Czech colleagues. I quickly found that my scientific reputation would
be at stake ifI continued to do so. During the first decade of this work,
much of my research was done in isolation, and I had to carefully censor
my communications with other professionals. I found only a handful of
friends with whom I could openly talk about my findings.

My situation started to change in 1967, when I was awarded a scholarship
from a foundation for psychiatric research in New Haven, Connecticut. This
made it possible for me to come to the United States and continue my
psychedelic research at the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center in
Baltimore. During my lectures in various American cities, I connected
with many colleagues -- consciousness researchers, anthropologists,
parapsychologists, thanatologists, and others -- whose work resulted in
a scientific perspective that resembled or complemented my own.

One important event at this time was my encounter and friendship
with Abraham Maslow and Anthony Sutich, the founders of humanistic
psychology. Abe had conducted extensive research into spontaneous mystical
states, or “peak experiences," and came to conclusions very similar to my
own. Out ofour joint meetings came the idea oflaunching a new discipline
that would combine science and spirituality and incorporate the perennial
wisdom concerning various levels and states of consciousness.

The new movement, which we called “transpersonal psychology," attracted
many enthusiastic followers. As their numbers grew, I felt for the first
time a sense of professional identity and belonging. However, one problem
still remained： transpersonal psychology, although comprehensive and
cohesive in its own right, seemed hopelessly separated from mainv stream
sctence.

Another decade passed before it became obvious that traditional science
was itselfundergoing a conceptual revolution of unprecedented proportions.

The radical changes that were introduced into the scientific worldview
by Einstein’s theories of relativity and quantum theory were followed
by equally profound revisions occurring in many other disciplines. New
connections were being established between transpersonal psychology and
the emerging scientific worldview that has become known as the “new
paradigm.”

At present, we are still lacking a satisfactory synthesis of these
developments, which are replacing old ways of thinking about the
world. However, the impressive mosaic of new observations and theories that
are already available suggest that in the future the old/new discoveries
in regard to consciousness and the human psyche might become integral
parts of a comprehensive scientific worldview.

Three decades of detailed and systematic studies of the human mind
through observations of nonordinary states of consciousness in others
and myself have led me to some radical conclusions. I now believe that
consciousness and the human psyche are much more than accidental products
of the physiological processes in the brain; they are reflections of
the cosmic intelligence that permeates all of creation. We are not just
biological machines and highly developed animals, but also fields of
consciousness without limits, transcending space and time.

In this context, spirituality is an important dimension of existence,
and becoming aware of this fact is a desirable development in human life.
