---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXXVII
    Page: 70
Title: Of the special prayers of them that be continual workers in the word
  of this book
---
And right as the meditations of them that continually work in this grace and
in this work rise suddenly without any means, right so do their prayers. I
mean of their special prayers, not of those prayers that be ordained of Holy
Church. For they that be true workers in this work, they worship no prayer
so much： and therefore they do them, in the form and in the statute that
they be ordained of holy fathers before us. But their special prayers rise
evermore suddenly unto God, without any means or any premeditation in special
coming before, or going therewith.

And if they be in words, as they be but seldom, then be they but in full
few words： yea, and in ever the fewer the better. Yea, and if it be but
a little word of one syllable, me think it better than of two： and more,
too, according to the work of the spirit, since it so is that a ghostly
worker in this work should evermore be in the highest and the sovereignest
point of the spirit. That this be sooth, see by ensample in the course of
nature. A man or a woman, afraid with any sudden chance of fire or of man’s
death or what else that it be, suddenly in the height of his spirit, he is
driven upon haste and upon need for to cry or for to pray after help. Yea,
how? Surely, not in many words, nor yet in one word of two syllables. And
why is that? For him thinketh it over long tarrying for to declare the need
and the work of his spirit. And therefore he bursteth up hideously with a
great spirit, and cryeth a little word, but of one syllable： as is this
word “fire,” or this word “out!”

And right as this little word “fire” stirreth rather and pierceth more
hastily the ears of the hearers, so doth a little word of one syllable when it
is not only spoken or thought, but privily meant in the deepness of spirit;
the which is the height, for in ghostliness all is one, height and deepness,
length and breadth. And rather it pierceth the ears of Almighty God than
doth any long psalter unmindfully mumbled in the teeth. And herefore it is
written, that short prayer pierceth heaven.
