---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 78
By: Huai Nan Tzû
Tags:
  - Sacrifice-Death=Separation-Sin=Closing the Doors of the Senses
  - Sacrifice-Death=Renunciation-Detachment=Spiritual Poverty
  - Beauty-Peace=Peace=Serenity
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=The Terrestrial Paradise
  - Discernment-Truth=Knowledge=Profane Learning
  - Combat-Action=Work, Action and Society=Concerning Right Vocation or
    ‘Dharma'
Commentary: |
  This recalls Plato's doctrine of the charioteer and steeds in Phaedrus.
---
Now the orifices are doors and windows of the spirit： breath and will are
the messengers and signals of the five viscera, i.e., the animal life. When
the eyes and ears are under the allurements of colour and sound then the
passions (five viscera) are moved and not in a state of rest. When this is
the case flesh and blood sweep onward in their sensuousness unceasingly：
then, in turn, the spirit gallops forth wildly into the outward world of
sense and does not guard itself within its self-contained domain. When this
condition is reached, the coming of distress and joy, though mountainously
great, is hot understood. On the contrary, were the ear and eye clear and
pure without the allurement of desires： the breath and will simple and
unalloyed, happy and contented and few in its appetites： the animal life
reposeful, not being wasted and scattered： the spirit self-possessed and
centred within the bodily frame and not scattered without： when these
conditions exist, it would follow that the past ages could be known and the
coming events of the future could be seen, and even more than this could be
done. Hence it is said a large exploration only gives a little knowledge.
That is to say the spirit should not be exercised in the extraneous. Look
within. The five colours confuse the eye, causing it to lose its clarity. The
five tones derange the ear, leading to loss of true perception. The five
flavours disorganize the palate, causing it to injure the taste, likes and
dislikes confuse the heart, causing it to lose its proper course in action.
These four, ... though they are the means by which life is carried on, yet,
involve all men in their toils.
