---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Consciousness, Transcendence
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 183-185
  Source:
    Title: The Phenomenon of Man
By: Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Title: Spiritual Energy
---
There is no concept more familiar to us than that of spiritual energy,
yet there is none that is more opaque scientifically. On the one hand,
the objective reality of psychical effort and work is so well established
that the whole of ethics rests on it and, on the other hand, the nature
of this inner power is so intangible that the whole description of the
universe in mechanical terms has had no need to take account ofit, but
has been successfully completed in deliberate disregard ofits reality.

The difficulties we still encounter in trying to hold together spirit
and matter in a reasonable perspective are nowhere more harshly
revealed. Nowhere either is the need more urgent of building a bridge
between the two banks of our existence -- the physical and the moral
-- if we wish the material and spiritual sides ofour activities to be
mutually enlivened.

To connect the two energies, of the body and the soul, in a coherent
manner： science has provisionally decided to ignore the question,
and it would be very convenient for us to do the same. Unfortunately, or
fortunately, caught up as we are here in the logic ofa system where the
within of things has just as much or even more value than their without,
we collide with the difficulty head on. It is impossible to avoid the
clash： we must advance.

Naturally the following considerations do not pretend to be a truly
satisfactory solution of the problem of spiritual energy. Their aim is
merely to show by means of one example what, in my opinion, an integral
science of nature should adopt as its line of research and the kind of
interpretation it should follow.

The Problem of the Two Energies

Since the inner face of the world is manifest deep within our human
consciousness, and there reflects upon itself, it would seem that we
have only got to look at ourselves in order to understand the dynamic
relationships existing between the within and the without of things at
a given point in the universe.

In fact, to do so is one ofthe most difficult of all things.

We are perfectly well aware in our concrete actions that the two opposite
forces combine. The motor works, but we cannot make out the method, which
seems to be contradictory. What makes the crux -- and an irritating one at
that-- of the problem of spiritual energy for our reason is the heightened
sense that we bear without ceasing in ourselves that our action seems at
once to depend on, and yet to be independent of, material forces.

First of all, the dependence. This is depressingly and magnificently
obvious. “To think, we must eat.” That blunt statement expresses a
whole economy, and reveals, according to the way we look at it, either
the tyranny of matter or its spiritual power. The loftiest speculation,
the most burning love are, as we know only too well, accompanied and
paid for by an expenditure of physical energy. Sometimes we need bread,
sometimes wine, sometimes a drug or a hormone injection, sometimes the
stimulation ofa colour, sometimes the magic of a sound which goes in at
our ears as a vibration and reaches our brains in the form of inspiration.

Without the slightest doubt there is something through which material and
spiritual energy hold together and are complementary. In last analysis,
somehow or other, there must be a single energy operating in the world. And
the first idea that occurs to us is that the “soul” must be as it were
a focal point oftransformation at which, from all the points of nature,
the forces of bodies converge, to become interiorised and sublimated in
beauty and truth.

Yet, seductive though it be, the idea of the direct transformation of
one of these two energies into the other is no sooner glimpsed than it
has to be abandoned. As soon as we try to couple them together, their
mutual independence becomes as clear as their interrelation.

Once again： "To think, we must eat." But what a variety of thoughts we
get out of one slice of bread! Like the letters of the alphabet, which
can equally well be assembled into nonsense as into the most beautiful
poem, the same calories seem as indifferent as they are necessary to the
spiritual values they nourish.

The two energies -- of mind and matter -- spread respectively through
the two layers of the world (the within and the without) have, taken
as a whole, much the same demeanour. They are constantly associated and
in some way pass into each other. But it seems impossible to establish
a simple correspondence between their curves. On the one hand, only a
minute fraction of“physical" energy is used up in the highest exercise
of spiritual energy; on the other, this minute fraction, once absorbed,
results on the internal scale in the most extraordinary oscillations.
