---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 286
  Source:
    Title: the Change
By: Germaine Greer
---
There is no point in growing old unless you can be a witch, and accumulate
spiritual power in place of the political and economic power that has been
denied you as a woman. Witches are descended from the sibyls and female
saints; their lineage is noble and no woman need be ashamed to call herselfa
witch. This does not mean that she has to dress up and babble meaningless
formulae in cellars and crypts. The wild white witches live outdoors and
hobnob with the lower orders.

The object of facing up squarely to the fact of the climacteric is
to acquire serenity and power. If women on the youthful side ofthe
climacteric could glimpse what this state ofpeaceful potency might be,
the difficulties of making the transition would be less. It is the nature
of the case that life beyond the menopause is as invisible to the woman
who has yet to struggle through the change as the top of any mountain is
invisible from the valley below. Calm and poise do not simply happen to the
postmenopausal woman; she has to fight for them. When the fight is over her
altered state might look to a younger woman rather like exhaustion, when
in reality it is anything but. The dependent woman is obliged to believe
that only her turmoil ofpassion, fear, rage, expectancy and disappointment
is living and that when she is no longer tormented by desire, insecurity,
jealousy and the rest ofthe paraphernalia of romance she will be as dead
as a spent match. The difference between her clamorous feelings and the
feelings of the silent, apparently withdrawn older woman is the difference
between the perception of the sea of someone tossing upon the surface, and
of one who has plunged so deep that she has felt death in her throat. The
older woman’s love is not love of herself, nor of herself mirrored
in a lover’s eyes, nor is it corrupted by need. It is a feeling of
tenderness so still and deep and warm that it gilds every grassblade
and blesses every fly. It includes the ones who have a claim on it,
and a great deal else besides. I wouldn’t have missed it for the world.
