---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 677-678
Tags:
  - Beauty-Peace=Beauty=Virtue
  - Beauty-Peace=Beauty=Beauty and Knowledge
  - Beauty-Peace=Peace=Serenity
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Doctrinal Explanations of Evil
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion
By: St Francis de Sales
---
An action cannot be called virtuous if it proceed not from the affection which
the heart bears to the excellence and beauty of reason. ... Is not prudence
itself imprudent in an intemperate man? Fortitude, without prudence, justice
and temperance, is not fortitude, but folly; and justice is unjust in the
weak man who dares not do it, in the intemperate man who permits himself to be
carried away with passion, and in the imprudent man who is not able to discern
between the right and the wrong. Justice is not justice unless it be strong,
prudent and temperate; nor is prudence prudence unless it be temperate, just
and strong; nor fortitude fortitude unless it be just, prudent and temperate;
nor temperance temperance unless it be prudent, strong and just. In fine,
a virtue is not perfect virtue, unless it be accompanied by all the rest. ...

There are certain inclinations which are esteemed virtues and are not so, but
favours and advantages of nature. How many are there who are naturally sober,
mild, silent, chaste and modest? Now all these seem to be virtues, and yet
have no more the merit thereof than bad inclinations are blameworthy before
we have given free and voluntary consent to such natural dispositions. It
is no virtue to be by nature a man of little meat, yet to abstain by choice
is a virtue. It is no virtue to be silent by nature, though it is a virtue
to bridle one’s tongue by reason. Many consider they have the virtues as
long as they do not practise the contrary vices. One that has never been
assaulted may truly boast that he was never a runaway, yet he has no ground
to boast of his valour. ...

In truth the great S. Augustine shows, in an epistle which he wrote to S.
Jerome, that we may have some sort of virtue without having the rest, but that
we cannot have perfect ones without having them all; whilst, as for vices,
we may have some without having others, yea, it is even impossible to have
them all together; so that it does not follow that he who has lost all the
virtues has by consequence all the vices, since almost every virtue has two
opposite vices, which are not only contrary to the virtue but also to one
another. He who has forfeited valour by rashness cannot at the same time
be taxed with cowardice; nor can he who has lost liberality by prodigality,
be at the same time reproached with niggardliness.
