---
Tags:
  - Trials=Liberation
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 368-370
  Source:
    Title: A Course in Miracles
By:
  - Helen Schucman
  - William Thetford
Title: The Coming of the Guest
---
Why would you not perceive it as a release from suffering to learn that you
are free," Why would you not acclaim the truth instead oflooking on it as an
enemy." Why does an easy path, so clearly marked it is impossible to lose
the way, seem thorny, rough and far too difficult for you to follow? Is
it not because you see it as the road to hell instead oflooking on it as
a simple way, without a sacrifice or any loss, to find yourselfin Heaven
and in God." Until you realize you give up nothing, until you understand
there is no loss, you will have some regrets about the way that you have
chosen. And you will not see the many gains your choice has offered you. Yet
though you do not see them, they are there. Their cause has been effected,
and they must be present where their cause has entered in.

You have accepted healing’s cause, and so it must be you are healed. And
being healed, the power to heal must also now be yours. The miracle is not
a separate thing that happens suddenly, as an effect without a cause. Nor
is it, in itself; a cause. But where its cause is must it be. Now is it
caused, though not as yet perceived. And its effects are there, though not
yet seen. Look inward now, and you will not behold a reason for regret,
but cause indeed for glad rejoicing and for hope of peace.

It has been hopeless to attempt to find the hope of peace upon a
battleground. It has been futile to demand escape from sin and pain ofwhat
was made to serve the function ofretaining sin and pain. For pain and sin
are one illusion, as are hate and fear, attack and guilt but one. Where
they are causeless their effects are gone, and love must come wherever
they are not. Why are you not rejoicing? You are free of pain and sickness,
misery and loss, and all effects of hatred and attack. \.-" o more is pain
your friend and guilt your god, and you should welcome the effects of love.

Your Guest has come. You asked Him, and He came. You did not hear Him
enter, for you did not wholly Welcome Him. And yet His gifts came with
Him. He has laid them at your feet, and asks you now that you will look
on them and take them for your own. He needs your help in giving them
to all who walk apart, believing they are separate and alone. They will
be healed when you accept your gifts, because your Guest will welcome
everyone whose te‘et have touched the holy ground whereon you stand,
and where His gifts for them are laid.

You do not see how much you now can give, because of everything you have
received. Yet He \ Vho entered in but waits for you to come where you
invited Him to be. There is no other place where He can find His host, nor
where His host can meet with Him. And nowhere else His gifts of peace and
joy, and all the happiness His Presence brings, can be obtained. For they
are where He is Who brought them with Him, that they might be yours. You
cannot see your Guest, but you can see the gifts He brought. And when you
look on them, you will believe His Presence must be there. For what you
now can do could not be done without the love and grace His Presence holds.

Such is the promise ofthe loving God; His Son have life and every living
thing be part of him, and nothing else have life. What you have given
" life" is not alive, and symbolizes but your wish to be alive apart
from life, alive in death, with death perceived as life, and living,
death. Confusion follows on confusion here, for on confusion has this
world been based, and there is nothing else it rests upon, lts base does
not change, although it seems to be in constant change. Yet what is that
except the state confusion really means? Stability to those who are
confused is meaningless, and shift and change become the law on which
they predicate their lives.

The body does not change. It represents the larger dream that change is
possible. To change is to attain a state unlike the one in which you
toiund yourself before. There is no change in immortality, and Heaven
knows it not. Yet here on earth it has a double purpose, for it can
be made to teach opposing things. And they reflect the teacher who is
teaching them. The body can appear to change with time, with sickness or
with health, and with events, that seem to alter it. Yet this： but means
the mind remains unchanged in its beliefof what the purpose olithe body is.

Sickness is a demand the body be a thing that it is not, lts nothingness
is guarantee that it can not be sick. In your demand that it be more than
this lies the idea of sickness. For it asks that God be less than all
He really is. What‘ then, becomes of you, for it is you of whom the
sacrifice is asked? For He is told that part of Him belongs to Him no
longer. He must sacrifice your self, and in His sacrifice are you made
more and He is lessened by the loss of you. And what is gone from Him
becomes your god, protecting you from being part of Him.

The body that is asked to be a god will be attacked, because its nothingness
has not been recognized. And so it seems to be a thing with power in
itself. As something, it can be perceived and thought to feel and act,
and hold you in its grasp as prisoner to itself. And it can fail to be
what you demanded that it be. And you will hate it for its littleness,
unmindful that the failure does not lie in that it is not more than it
should be, but only in your failure to perceive that it is nothing. Yet
its nothingness is your salvation, from which you would flee.

As “something” is the body asked to be God’s enemy, replacing what
He is with littleness and limit and despair. It is His loss you celebrate
when you behold the body as a thing you love, or look upon it as a thing
you hate. For if He be the Sum of everything, then what is not in Him does
not exist, and His completion is its nothingness. Your savior is not dead,
nor does he dwell in what was built as a temple unto death. He lives in
God, and it is this that makes him savior unto you, and only this. His
body’s nothingness releases yours from sickness and from death. For
what is yours cannot be more or less than what is his.
