---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 432
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation=The False Light
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation='And Ye Shall Be as Gods'
  - Discernment-Truth=Knowledge=Profane Learning
  - Combat-Action=Judgement=On Hell and Damnation
By: Ruysbroeck
Commentary: \'Quietism' in its most malignant form means the submergence
  and passive fusion of will into the subconscious and infernal, in
  contradistinction to active realization of the supraconscious and
  divine.
---
When a man possesses the natural rest in bare vacancy, whilst in all
his works he has himself in mind, and he continues obstinately
disobedient in his self-will, he cannot be united with God; for he
lives without charity in unlikeness to God. ... All these men are, in
their own opinion. God-seeing men, and believe themselves the holiest
of all men living. Yet they live contrary and unlike to God and all
saints and all good men. Observe the following marks： thus you will
be able to recognise them both by their words and their works. By
means of the natural rest which they feel and possess in themselves in
bare vacancy, they believe themselves to be free, and to be united
with God without means, and to be above all the customs of Holy
Church, and above the commandments of God, and above the law, and
above every work of virtue which can in any way be done. ... And they
are sometimes possessed of the Fiend; and then they are so cunning
that one cannot vanquish them on the grounds of reason. But through
Holy Scripture and the teaching of Christ and our Faith, we may prove
that they are deceived. ... For they live contrary to God and
righteousness and all saints; and they are all precursors of the
Antichrist, preparing his way in every unbelief. For they would be
free, without the commandments of God, and without virtues; and empty
and united with God, without love and charity. And they would be
God-seeing men without loving and steadfast contemplation, and the
holiest of all men living without the works of holiness. And they say
that they rest in Him Whom they do not love; and are uplifted into
That which they neither will nor desire. ... And they would cunningly
disguise the worst, so that it should seem the best. All these are
contrary to God and all His saints; but they have a likeness to the
damned spirits in hell, for these too are without charity and without
knowledge, and are empty of thanksgivings and praise and of all loving
adherence; and this is the cause, why they remain damned in eternity.
And that these folk may be like to them they lack only this, that they
should fall from time into eternity, and that the justice of God be
revealed in their works.
