---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 37-38
  Source:
    Title: The Spiritual Crisis of Man
By: Paul Brunton
---
If one purpose of human life upon this earth is to unfold spiritually
and ifa section of humanity is driven by the pressures of crisis and the
sufferings of war to seek such unfoldment, why should not the World Mind
permit these drastic happenings? The same Nature which gives us mild balmy
summers also gives us arctic cold winters. The same universal laws which
bring the sunlight of noon also bring the midnight of darkness. The same
Power which is bringing infant humanity through its first fumbling steps
towards self-realization, is also permitting it to fall and bruise itself
because only so will humanity ever learn to walk. Who can deny that at least
one section of humanity needs the whip ofsuffering to act as a lesson in
its moral education or as punishment for its blind sins or as stimulant to
awaken it from stagnation into evolutionary movement? Those who will take
the trouble to look deep beneath appearances for realities may even see in
these very same world happenings the vindication of the World Mind’s care
for humanity and a demonstration of Its presence in the world.

To seek any way of escape from devastating happenings which seem to creep
closer and closer, without including the way of trying sincerely to fulfil the
spiritual purpose of his life on earth, is to live in a fool's paradise. The
indifference of man to the silent pleading ofTruth and his displacement from
the spiritual centre of his being, cannot last for ever. It took the dangerous
stresses of an unexampled war to offer the second chance of a great initiation
to the world. That could and should have been a purifyiting process for those
who had become too attached to earthly things and who did not trouble to bother
about why they were here at all. Since pain and suffering are never welcome
and seldom understood, the voice of woe rose in a long lament and echoed over
the whole planet. All were being given another chance for self-regeneration,
yet few knew it in their surface consciousnessl Not only may intense suffering
help to arouse a lethargic nation or an inert individual to neglected duties
but if not too prolonged, it may also tend to awaken latent will-power.

It would be absurd to declare that all affliction serves destiny's ends.
After we have made all allowance for those calamities which are born out of
our own errors and sins; and also for those with which the Overself forces our
individual or collective development; and after we have further allowed for
those which are the natural consequences of the interdependence of mankind,
affecting us through the frailty any imperfections of other people, it must
nevertheless be admitted that there remains a proportion which are not of our
own making at all. Whence do they come then? Although the suffering of human
beings is often indicative that they have strayed from the right path, a part
of it is always coincidental with human existence itself. The affliction to
which they are exposed may not necessarily be the consequence of personal
karma. It may be the consequence of being human. Whoever understands this
statement, understands already a quarter of the Buddha's teaching. When he
pointed out on how precarious a balance all human happiness rests, he pointed
out a salutary fact. The truth of his teaching about the essentially sorrowful
character oflife is usually disguised by the pleasures and relaxations of
life‘. It becomes apparent to the generality of people only when it is
thrust prominently into their consciousness by horrors and tragedies such as
those of war. Our generation has had the tragic character of existence thrown
into sharp relief. It has glimpsed dimly by its own painful experience what
philosophy always knew clearly by its tranquil reflection. Among many other
things the war and crisis have been bold and unforgettable demonstrations of
the fact that suffering is inseparably allied to life in this world. It is in
fact forever with us, albeit on an unimpressive and unimposing scale. It is
so familiar that we tend to remain untouched by its normal existence. Only
the extremely thoughtful who love truth or seek peace take note ofits
ever-presence and seek also for some deeper solution of its meaning or
durable escape from its burden. Where is the joy which is not sooner or
later mingled with sorrow? A happiness which is not mixed at some point or
at some time with misery, can nowhere be found on earth.
