---
Source:
  URL: https://tricycle.org/trikedaily/satipatthana-sutta-mindfulness/
  Translator: Thanissaro Bhikkhu
  Locus:
    Date: 5 March 2018
    Section: II
  Source:
    Title: Satipatthana Sutta
    ID: 34a30556-7dcf-465e-a9a7-7b3ac1f0f124
By: Gautama Buddha
Title: Body
---
“And how does a monk remain focused on the body in and of itself?

“There is the case where a monk- having gone to the wilderness, to
the shade of a tree, or to an empty building-sits down folding his
legs crosswise, holding his body erect and setting mindfulness to the
fore. Always mindful, he breathes in; mindful he breathes out.

“Breathing in long, he discerns, ‘I am breathing in long’; or
breathing out long, he discerns, ‘I am breathing out long.’ Or breathing
in short, he discerns, ‘I am breathing in short’; or breathing out
short, he discerns, ‘I am breathing out short.’ He trains himself,
‘I will breathe in sensitive to the entire body’; he trains himself,
‘I will breathe out sensitive to the entire body.’ He trains himself,
‘I will breathe in calming bodily fabrication’ [in other words, the
in-and-out breath]; he trains himself, ‘I will breathe out calming bodily
fabrication.’ Just as a dexterous turner or his apprentice, when making
a long turn, discerns, ‘I am making a long turn,’ or when making a
short turn discerns, ‘I am making a short turn’; in the same way the
monk, when breathing in long, discerns, ‘I am breathing in long’; or
breathing out long, he discerns, ‘I am breathing out long.’ ... He
trains himself, ‘I will breathe in calming bodily fabrication’;
he trains himself, ‘I will breathe out calming bodily fabrication.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself, or externally on the body in and of itself, or both internally
and externally on the body in and of itself. Or he remains focused on
the phenomenon of origination [Pali samudaya, referring not to the simple
arising of something, but to the processes that cause it to arise] with
regard to the body, on the phenomenon of passing away with regard to the
body, or on the phenomenon of origination and passing away with regard
to the body. Or his mindfulness that ‘There is a body’ is maintained
to the extent of knowledge and remembrance. And he remains independent,
unsustained by [not clinging to] anything in the world. This is how a
monk remains focused on the body in and of itself.

“And further, when walking, the monk discerns, ‘I am walking.’ When
standing, he discerns, ‘I am standing.’ When sitting, he discerns,
‘I am sitting.’ When lying down, he discerns, ‘I am lying down.’
Or however his body is disposed, that is how he discerns it.

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself ... This is how a monk remains focused on the body in and of itself.

“And further, when going forward and returning, he makes himself fully
alert; when looking toward and looking away ... when flexing and extending
his limbs ... when carrying his outer cloak, his upper robe, and his
bowl ... when eating, drinking, chewing, and savoring ... when urinating and
defecating ... when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up,
talking, and remaining silent, he makes himself fully alert.

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself ... This is how a monk remains focused on the body in and of itself.

“And further ... just as if a sack with openings at both ends were full of
various kinds of grain-wheat, rice, mung beans, kidney beans, sesame seeds,
husked rice-and a man with good eyesight, pouring it out, were to reflect,
‘This is wheat. This is rice. These are mung beans. These are kidney
beans. These are sesame seeds. This is husked rice,’ in the same way,
the monk reflects on this very body from the soles of the feet on up, from
the crown of the head on down, surrounded by skin and full of various kinds
of unclean things： ‘In this body there are head hairs, body hairs,
nails, teeth, skin, flesh, tendons, bones, bone marrow, kidneys, heart,
liver, pleura, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines, gorge,
feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, skin-oil, saliva,
mucus, fluid in the joints, urine.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself ... This is how a monk remains focused on the body in and of
itself.

“And further ... just as a dexterous butcher or his apprentice, having
killed a cow, would sit at a crossroads cutting it up into pieces,
the monk reflects on this very body-however it stands, however it is
disposed-in terms of properties： ‘In this body there is the earth
property, the liquid property, the fire property, and the wind property.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself ... This is how a monk remains focused on the body in and of itself.

“And further, as if he were to see a corpse cast away in a charnel
ground-one day, two days, three days dead-bloated, livid, and festering,
he applies it to this very body, ‘This body, too： Such is its nature,
such is its future, such its unavoidable fate.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself ... This is how a monk remains focused on the body in and of itself.

“Or again, as if he were to see a corpse cast away in a charnel ground,
being chewed by crows, being chewed by vultures, being chewed by hawks,
being chewed by dogs, being chewed by hyenas, being chewed by various
other creatures ... a skeleton smeared with flesh and blood, connected with
tendons ... a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, connected with
tendons ... a skeleton without flesh or blood, connected with tendons ...
bones detached from their tendons, scattered in all directions-here a hand
bone, there a foot bone, here a shin bone, there a thigh bone, here a hip
bone, there a back bone, here a rib, there a chest bone, here a shoulder
bone, there a neck bone, here a jaw bone, there a tooth, here a skull ...
the bones whitened, somewhat like the color of shells ... the bones
piled up, more than a year old ... the bones decomposed into a powder：
He applies it to this very body, ‘This body, too： Such is its nature,
such is its future, such its unavoidable fate.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on the body in and of
itself, or externally on the body in and of itself, or both internally
and externally on the body in and of itself. Or he remains focused on the
phenomenon of origination with regard to the body, on the phenomenon of
passing away with regard to the body, or on the phenomenon of origination
and passing away with regard to the body. Or his mindfulness that ‘There
is a body’ is maintained to the extent of knowledge and remembrance. And
he remains independent, unsustained by [not clinging to] anything in the
world. This is how a monk remains focused on the body in and of itself.
