---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 874-875
Tags:
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Realization
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Hold of Passion
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Incorruptibility
  - Combat-Action=Holy War=Endurance
Glossary:
  - Term: Asvattha tree
    Definition: Ficus religiosa or pipul tree
Commentary: Mâra then threatens Buddha with one of his arrows, which he
  eventually discharges, without however shaking the Buddha's resolve.
By: Asvaghosha
---
When the great sage (Gotama the Buddha), sprung from a line of royal sages,
sat down there (at the root of an Asvattha tree)4 with his soul fully resolved
to obtain the highest knowledge, the whole world rejoiced; but Mâra, the
enemy of the good law, was afraid. ...

His three sons, Confusion, Gaiety, and Pride, and his three daughters, Lust,
Delight, and Thirst, asked of him the reason of his despondency, and he thus
made answer unto them：

‘This sage, wearing the armour of resolution, and having drawn the
arrow of wisdom with the barb of truth, sits yonder intending to conquer
my realms. ... While, therefore, he stands within my reach and while his
spiritual eyesight is not yet attained, I will assail him to break his vow
as the swollen might of a river assails a dam.’

Then having seized his flower-made bow and his five infatuating
arrows, ... Mâra thus addressed the calm seer as he sat on his seat, preparing
to cross to the further side of the ocean of existence;

‘Up, up, O thou Kshatriya, afraid of death! follow thine own duty and abandon
this law of liberation! and having conquered the lower worlds by thy arrows,
proceed to gain the higher worlds of Indra. That is a glorious path to travel,
which has been followed by former leaders of men; this mendicant life is
ill-suited for one bom in the noble family of a royal sage to follow.’ ...

Then Mâra called to mind his own army, wishing to work the overthrow of the
Sakya saint; and his followers swarmed round, ... armed with tusks and with
claws, carrying headless trunks in their hands, and assuming many forms,
with half-mutilated faces, and with monstrous mouths

But the great sage ... remained untroubled ... like a lion seated in the
midst of oxen. Then Mâra commanded his excited army of demons to terrify
him; and forthwith that host resolved to break down his determination with
their various powers Before these monsters standing there, so dreadful in
form and disposition, the great sage remained unalarmed and untroubled,
sporting with them as if they had been only rude children. ...

Then some being of invisible shape, but of pre-eminent glory, standing in
the heavens -- beholding Mâra thus malevolent against the seer -- addressed
him in a loud voice, unruffled by enmity：

‘Take not on thyself, O Mâra, this vain fatigue, -- throw aside thy
malevolence and retire to peace; this sage cannot be shaken by thee any
more than the mighty mountain Meru by the wind. Even fire might lose its
hot nature, water its fluidity, earth its steadiness, but never will he
abandon his resolution, who has acquired his merit by a long course of
actions through unnumbered aeons. ... Until he attains the highest wisdom,
he will never rise from his seat, just as the sun does not rise, without
dispelling the darkness. ...’

Having listened to his words, and having seen the unshaken firmness Of the
great saint, Mâra departed dispirited and broken in purpose with those very
arrows by which, O world, thou art smitten in thy heart.

Thus he, the holy one, sitting there on his seat of grass at the root of
the tree, ... became the perfectly wise, the Bhagavat, the Arhat, the king
of the Law, the Tathâgata, He who has attained the knowledge of all forms,
the Lord of all science.
