---
Tags:
  - Surrender=The Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 390-391
  Source:
    Title: On Nature and the Environment
By: J. Krishnamurti
---
Silence is something extraordinary; it's not the silence between two
noises. Peace is not between two wars. Silence is something that comes
naturally when you are watching, when you are watching without motive,
without any kind ofdemand, just to watch, and see the beauty ofa single
star in the sky, or to watch a single tree in a field, or to watch your
wife~ or husband, or whatever you watch. To watch with a great silence
and space. Then in that watching, in that alertness, there is something
that is beyond words, beyond all measure.

We use words to measure the immeasurable. So one must be aware also of the
network of words, how words cheat us, how words mean so much： communism,
to a capitalist, means something terrible. Words become extraordinarily
important. But to be aware of those words and to live with the word silence,
knowing that the word is not silence, but to live with that word and see
the weight of that word, the content of that word, the beauty of that
word! So one begins to realize, when thought is quiet, watching, that
there is something beyond all imagination, doubt, and seeking. And there
is such a thing -- at least for the speaker. But what the speaker says
has no validity to another. If you listen, learn, watch, be totally free
from all the anxieties of life, then only is there a religion that brings
about a new, totally different culture. \ Ve are not cultured people at
all. You may be very clever in business, you may be extraordinarily capable
technologically, be a doctor or a professor; but we are still very limited.

The ending ofthe self, the “me”： to be nothing. The word nothing
means “not a thing.” Not a thing created by thought. To be nothing;
having no image of yourself. But we have a great many images of
ourselves. To have no image of any kind, no illusion, to be absolutely
nothing. The tree is nothing to itself. It exists. And in its very existence
it is the most beautiful thing, like those hills： they exist. They
don’t become something, because they can't. Like a seed ofan apple tree,
it is apple; it doesn’t try to become the pear, or another fruit -- it is.
