---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Disciplines and Spiritual Practice
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 160
  Source:
    Title: Seeking the Heart of Wisdom
By:
  - Joseph Goldstein
  - Jack Kornfield
Format: mixed
---
Spiritual practice is not a mindless repetition of ritual or prayer. It works
through consciously realizing the law of cause and effect and aligning our
lives to it. Perhaps we can sense the potential of awakening in ourselves,
but we must also see that it doesn't happen by itself. There are laws that
we can follow to actualize this potential. How we act, how we relate to
ourselves, to our bodies, to the people around us, to our work, creates
the kind of world we live in, creates our very freedom or suffering.

Over the years and throughout various cultures, many techniques
and systems of Buddhist practice have been developed to bring this
aspiration to fruition, but the essence ofawakening is always the same：
to see clearly and directly the truth ofour experience in each moment,
to be aware, to be mindful. This practice is a systematic development
and opening of awareness called by the Buddha the four foundations of
mindfulness： awareness of the body, awareness of feelings, awareness
of mental phenomena, and awareness of truths, of the laws of experience.

To succeed in the cultivation of mindfulness, said the Buddha, is the
highest benefit, informing all aspects ofour life. “Sandalwood and tagara
are delicately scented and give a little fragrance, but the fragrance of
virtue and a mind well trained rises even to the gods."

How are we to begin,： The Path of Purfication, an ancient Buddhist text
and guide, was written in answer to a short poem：

  The world is entangled in a knot.
  Who can untangle the tangle?

It is to untangle the tangle that we begin meditation practice. To
disentangle ourselves, to be free, requires that we train our attention. We
must begin to see how we get caught by fear, by attachment, by aversion --
caught by suffering. This means directing attention to our everyday
experience and learning to listen to our bodies, hearts, and minds. We
attain wisdom not by creating ideals but by learning to see things clearly,
as they are.
