---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Illness
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 343-351
  Source:
    Title: Scar Tissue
By: Michael Ignatieff
---
He said he had someone he wanted me to meet. “A teacher," he said,
as we eased into the morning rush-hour traffic on the cross-town
expressway. “Like you.”

The patient had come in with symptoms of numbness and pain in his muscles
and joints. That was five years ago. He had ordered some tests, but they
were just to be sure. He knew right away.

“Classic presentation. ALS.”

My brother spelled it out for me, “Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
also known as motor neurone disease.”

“Stephen Hawking’s disease?”

My brother nodded. “Radical and irreversible deterioration of the nerve
centres responsible for muscular and autonomic function." It had never
occurred to me before that my brother had to tell people they were going
to die.

“How did you tell him?"

My brother signalled and pulled off the expressway ramp at the Charlestown
exit and he said, “I'm always giving people the good news. His name,
by the way, is Moe.”

In the lobby of the St. Mary’s Extended Care Centre, the wheelchair
cases are lined up against the walls; some are moaning, some intoning
private mantras, some asleep with their mouths open, and some staring
out at the heat shimmer above the lawn. Moes room is near the lobby and
his door is open.

Moe is lying on his side, facing a computer terminal and a printer, and
there is a tube taped to the side of his pillow. My brother pats his arm
in greeting and Moe gives a deep gargling sound by way of reply. I say
hello and position myselfin Moe’s eyeline. He is a big man, with a full
strong chest covered in dark curly black hair. His diminished thighs and
legs lie concealed beneath a white sheet. He purses his lips round the
tube and I can see his cheeks puffing out and his forehead wrinkling with
effort. Slowly the words tap out on the computer screen： “It is good
of U to come.” The computer department at Moe’s school had come up
with the software and the hospital technical department had devised the
straw and the keyboard. Moe can’t move or talk but he can communicate
with the world by blowing through a straw to activate the keyboard.

There are pictures of his wife and children on the walls, some of their
drawings from school, a poster ofa Greek Orthodox icon, and a sign saying,
Nuclear Free Zone： No Enemas Here, and another one saying： If Choking
or Gagging, Sit Me Upright.

I ask him what he thinks ofhis doctor, and Moe purses his lips together
to send a message to the screen.

“He does what I tell him."

Both of them grin. “Any problems?” my brother asks and the nurse
explains that he is having trouble with his bedsores. Moe blows into his
straw. The word “Ouch!” comes up on the screen.

With an expert, gentle touch, my brother lifts the sheet and turns Moe
over. His hip and his right shoulder are inflamed where his body weight
presses him against the sheets. His legs are frighteningly thin and
emaciated. While my brother is telling the nurses to change the bedsore
ointment, Moe winks at me.

My brother leaves me to look in on another patient and I tell him I
wouldn‘t mind staying and talking to Moe for a while. Moe must think
I am a strange kind of visitor, pressing into the domains of intimacy so
quickly because I sit down on the bottom of the bed and ask him, right away,
how much pain he is having. One by one, the words come tip on the screen：

i cant sit up because i cant hold my head up and to support it makes me
gag, so my days are now spent lying on my side.

there is no pain attributable directly to als although the deterioration
ofthe organ in the bia'instem which controls body temperature andfrequent
choking spells have led to some very traumatic moments, eating has become
a hazardous occupation, as well my hips often hurt from lying that way.

i have had much time to ponder and reflect and to try to understand what
is happening, i write almost every day.

it has been 4 years since i could hold a pen.

It takes him many minutes to get this on to the screen and when he finishes
he has to lie back and rest. Words matter to this man. Filling a screen
with words is equal to a whole day’s teaching in the classroom for me.

What I want to know is why he isn’t more angry.

Letter by letter the words appear on the screen：

i was angry for about three years, it ate me up. Then i stopped being
angry, now i pray tojesus christ.

I have no right to object to this, but I do, strenuously. I tell him
that I will not pray to someone who makes him suffer like this. His
mischievous eyes do not lose their sense of humour. Letter by letter,
more words emerge on the green screen.

i lie here; i cannot move; however; i can listen, think, pray, how u’
it i feel love? and where is it comingfrom?

I am sitting on his bed by this time, awkwardly laying my hand on his
shoulder, wondering ifhe is able to feel it there.

I tell him it isn’t my business to come all this way to try to turn him
into an atheist. He smiles and then indicates his water bottle with his
eyes. I help him drink his water through a straw. After that he goes to
sleep almost immediately, his mouth open, his face blank with exhaustion.

His wife comes by, and we eat a sandwich in the corridor together while
Moe is sleeping. She is a nurse herself with a full-time job and three
kids to raise on her own, yet she manages to get down to the hospital
every day to visit him. Five years spent in the company of illness have
refined her pretty face into something grave and fine.

" Your brother has been good to Moe,” she says. “Not like some of
the other doctors.”

“Moe says my brother does what he tells him to."

“It wasn't that way at the beginning, I can tell you. Your brother
wanted Moe to do this and that, wanted him to fight this right down to the
wire, and Moe went along for some time, and then I said, This is crazy,
you know. We're talking about disease here, not some sports event, not
some competition you can win or make a good showing in or anything like
that. I think that woke Moe up some. He isn’t like that any more."

“Neither is my brother," I say.

“I think he learned that from Moe. Accepting things."

She leaves and says I can stay until he wakes up again. When Moe comes to,
I put my hand on his shoulder and say I had better be going. He makes one
of those gargling sounds and I figure out that he wants the tube placed
in his mouth. A word comes up on the screen.

“stay.”

When the nurses have changed his catheter and sponge-bathed his body,
I ask him how he feels about the future. He doesn’t seem to mind being
asked. I put the tube between his lips and stand behind him to watch the
words slowly come up on the screen.

feel that i have to choose to live even now which 1'»： hardfor someone
so tired when 1' do this he takes care ofmete mifear and anxieti so hoping
that 1' can be (anxiousfor the move.

“Conscious for the move." The words glow on the screen and at first I
don't understand them. Moe lies next to the screen, some of its green pallor
reflected on his face, his eyes shut, the tube resting on his open lips.

Then I realise what he is trying to say. He wants to see everything, to
te'el everything, to hold on to his awareness oflii‘e until the very
last moment; and to him this consciousness-whatever its desolation-is
worth fighting for to the last instant. I have never met anyone before
who values the ordinary state of, human awareness so keenly.

It goes dark and the fluorescent lights come on overhead. A nurse comes
in and puts a visor on Moe’s forehead to shield him from the light and
to allow him to see the computer screen better. I tell him he looks like
the dealer at a crap game in a gangster movie. He smiles.

Then I ask him, as I might have asked a priest ifI had one, what I should
think about my mother’s illness. His eyes, remain shut for a long time,
then his lips close around the tube and letter by letter, pause by pause,
space by space, over twenty-five minutes, words begin to emerge onto
the screen.

consider thefollowing now

I) illness, not the beginning of the end but the beginning of THE beginning,
to be honest i did not FEEL this very strongly till about 6 months ago,
nevertheless, i lived every day since my diagnosis to the fullest knowing
the physical exertion would speed the progression gofthe illness, to
sit back however, would have only robbed me of moments with my family
andfriends.

thus, i continue, only now i sense ihad become a stoic or afightet;
i would probably be gone by now, rather; iface each day with a prayer,
i try to be completely open to whatever christ brings.

The word “stoic” gives me the idea that he might have read my
lecture. It made sense after all. I had sent it to my brother, though he’d
never told me what he thought about it. While Moe is having another test,
I get talking to one of the nurses and she tells me that my brother had
come in one day and plastered some sheets all around the room-because Moe
couldn’t hold anything in his hand-and then my brother got the nurses
to wheel Moe's bed round from sheet to sheet so that he could read the
whole lecture. I feel ridiculously pleased, as ifall the shame attendant
upon that lecture had suddenly been wiped away.

When Moe wakes up, I tell him how angry the lecture had made my wife. Up
on the screen come the words,

anger is a waste oftime.

I tell him that a friend of mine once said you don’t get any smarter or
wiser as you get older. All that happens is that you understand the true
meaning of cliche’s. Like： “Take it day by day." Or “As long as
you‘ve got your health." Or that cliche’ about anger： “You can't
get beyond it, until you’ve gone through it.” Words come up quickly
on the screen‘

so get through it.

I ask him what he thought about my lecture. His answer takes twenty minutes
to appear on the screen. More and more often he has to stop and rest.

better to know andgrowfrom the experience than to remain aloofand have
no basis for wisdom, stoicism, not much of a motivator： perhaps the
unsung reason for searching out ones" spirituality.

“Not much ofa motivator." It had turned out that I wasn’t much into
stoicism either, whatever I had said in that lecture. I was more ofa rage
rage type, actually. He winks when I say that.

I stroke his shoulder and want to say, though I can‘t get it right,
that what I had learned from him and from Mother was that when you strip
us right down, when illness pares us back to our core, we remain creatures
of the word. Nothing can save us but the word, the messages we send from
deep in the shaft of sickness.

Letters came up very slowly, one by one, on the screen.

believe in the word.

I tell him that my father had said she was on a voyage away from us,
and that there were times when we all wished we could follow her. She
couldn’t tell us what it was like, I say, but you can.

a journey, yes.

It takes minutes for him to get it down, his face sweating with the
effort. I can hardly bear to watch.

awayfrom my body awayfromfamily and the world I know,

I walk up and down the room, so I won’t have to look, feeling ashamed
of the effortlessness of my own body and my speech, while he lies there
underneath a sheet in a darkened room, struggling to report back from
unvisitable terrain：

into the heart of life.

I can’t ask any more of him. He lies still, eyes shut, beneath his
visor, sweating, emaciated, exhausted. I want to thank him, but it seems
altogether too lightweight a gesture to do that, as if] had come for advice
or a consultation or something, so I just say goodbye and stroke his inert
arm again and add, “we’re not finished with each other,” feeling
foolish that I have said it. A thin, tired cry issues from this throat.

A nurse comes in and sends a command to the printer which prints out his
part of our conversation. As I leave, I turn back. The computer screen
is glowing green and empty. Before it lies a big tapering shape under a
sheet, framed between the steel bars ofa hospital bed. The green visor
is still shading his eyes but he is asleep.

In a cab on the way back to my brother's place, I unroll the computer
paper and discover that, at the end ofwhat he had said to me, the nurse
had printed out a poem of his： i51\7.0* what is happening? what are
these flashes crashing noiselessly from side to side in my mind? spells
ofhrownoutsfollow ozone Cinders down the unknown path the child within
calls out how much farther, dad?

When I got back to my brother‘s place, he was sitting in a pool oflight
at the table, eating dinner. The glow of the city rose over the horizon
and above that there was a sky full ofstars. He was wearing a dressing
gown over a T-shirt and sweat pants, and in that dressing gown, in the
pool oflight, he looked solitary and grand, like some abbot in a mountain
monastery. “I kept some for you,” he said, and we ate the rest of his
Indian takeout together. When I told him I had spent the whole day with
Moe, he said, “I figured you might.” I asked him how long he gave him.

“Three months, maybe four at the outside.”

“Does he know?"

“Of course.”

I wondered about friendship between a doctor and a patient, between a man
who knows what it is like to die, second by second, and another man who
knows everything about that death-down to the molecular structure of cell
decay except what it feels like. He knew the meaning of those dark regions
of Mother’s scans, the hidden logic of the sequence of numbers in her
test scores. What he didn‘t know was what it was like to be her. It
struck me then that his science was the form of love he understood best.

I was thinking about this when he said, “ALS accelerates if you move;
slows down ifyou keep still. Every time Moe communicates it speeds up
the deterioration. Further proof, if need there be, for the existence
ofa merciful creator -- as I always say to Moe."

“And what does Moe say to that?”

“He says mind your own damned business."

My brother pushed back his chair. “I use Moe in my medical ethics
classes. I ask them whether a certain neurologist is entitled to allow
an ALS patient to hook up to a computer system, if the doctor knows that
using it will shorten the patient's life.”

" So why did you?”

My brother gave a small laugh. “My students always say the doctor
shouldn’t. Then I take them to meet Moe. He changes their minds in
halfan hour. What conclusion do we draw? I ask them."

“Speech can matter more than life itself," I said.

“Exactly,” my brother said and lit a cigarette. “The word. Believe
in the word."

My brother cleared away the boxes of takeout and went to the fridge and
got out a beer for each of us.

“I also give my class a thought experiment. If you had to choose,
which would you prefer： to lose your mind but keep your body, or to
lose your body but keep your mind?”

“I don‘t like games like that," I said.

“Thought experiments.”

“I don‘t care what the hell they're called.”

He ignored me. “Asking this question is a way of exploring the value
human beings place on self-awareness.”

“It's voyeuristic,” I said.

“Come on,” he said. “We’re all moral tourists here. Illness is
another country. None of us has any idea. That’s what thought experiments
are for. My students, by the way, are all sure. Until they meet Moe."

“And then?”

“He tells them about the choking spells or watching his legs wasting
away, and then,” my brother smiled, “they're not so sure. He’s
great with students.”

“You must make a hell of a team,” I said.

My brother went over and sat on the sofa. “Mother can only suffer. She
can’t give her experience any meaning. That’s the worst thing about
it for her."

I didn’t know why he was so sure about this, but I let him go on. “Moe,
on the other hand, can shape his experience. He sees it in a Christian
light -- which I can’t stand -- but that is what keeps him holding
on. I nearly counted him out twice before this, you know. Respiratory
infections. Each time he pulls himself back from the edge.”

“Positive mental attitude,” I said. I didn’t know what name to
give to that fierce thing which made Moe refuse his fate, but whatever
its name, even desperation, it was life, and my “stoicism” now seemed
to me nothing more than surrender.

My brother walked across the darkened room and stood looking out at the
blue lights of the runways at Logan. “I used to think, because of Mother,
that consciousness was the most precious thing of all, and oblivion the
thing to be resisted at all costs. Now I’m not so sure. Now I see what
Moe is going through, how he sees his own linguistic powers disintegrating,
his own words and sentences unravelling on the screen. I’m not so sure
I could stand it.”

I wasn't sure why he was telling me all this, but l was glad he was. Finally
he said, “It‘s all a question of how much awareness a human being can
stand.” He glanced back at me from the window. “I know what you think,
but believe me, it’s good that Mother doesn’t know.”

“She’s still suffering. It's not over. She still knows what's
happening.”

“Sure?” he said.

“Sure,” I said. “After all, she still recognises you. As long as
she does, she can still suffer.”

I wanted to tell my brother about the night when I had lain beside my mother
in the dark and watched her sleep, lying on her back with her mouth open,
how I had imagined taking the pillow and holding it over her face. I wanted
to confess the shame of that to someone, to unburden myself of that memory
and the rage it contained. Then, just as quickly as those feelings came
over me again, I found myself thinking how absurd they were. Why had I
ever wanted to do such a thing? Her awareness, that fragile and damaged
thing, suddenly seemed infinitely precious to me, like a painted egg I
might have crushed in my hands and now saw for the thing that it was.

I didn't say any of this to my brother. Instead I told him about an evening
a few nights before when Mother and I had been sitting there in her room,
watching the people waiting at the bus stop in the rain opposite her
window, and she had seemed faded and blurred and ebbing away, and I told
her that I felt like going down to Boston to pay him a visit. Out of the
stillness of the room, she said, “I see him."

“What do you see?”

Long pause. She looked me straight in the eye.

“I see him walking through the gates oftruth.” My brother went
still. I knew he could see himself as she saw him： a small child, between
two ruined columns reaching up into the sky, among the flames and smoke
ofsome great destruction, 3 child frozen between the weight ofthe columns,
unable to move, within the gates of truth. I knew he saw her -- as I did --
standing on the other side of the gates, beckoning us both to follow.
