---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Illness
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 341-343
  Source:
    Title: The City of Joy
By: Dominique Lapierre
---
Every night at about eleven o’clock, it started up again. First came
the tears. Gradually they increased in intensity. The rhythm became more
accelerated and developed into a series of rattles which cascaded through
the dividing wall. A ten-year-old Muslim boy was dying of osteotuberculosis
in the hovel next door. His name was Sabia.

“Why this agony of an innocent in a place already scarred by so much
suffering?” protested an indignant Kovalski.

During the first few evenings the priest had succumbed to cowardice. He
had stopped up his ears with cotton so that he would not hear. “I
was like Job on the brink of revolt," he was to explain. “In vain I
scoured the Scriptures by the light of my oil lamp. I could not find a
satisfactory explanation for the idea that God could let such a thing
happen. Who could ever venture to say to a child like that, writhing in
pain： ‘Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven;
blessed are the sorrowful, for they shall find consolation; blessed are
those who thirst, for they shall be satisfied? The prophet Isaiah tried
hard to justify the suffering of the innocent. It was our suffering that
the boy was enduring, Isaiah affirmed, and he would help to save us from
our sins. The idea that the suffering of one human being could help to
save the world was certainly very alluring, but how could I concede
that the suffering of my little neighbor was part of that redemptive
process? Everything in me rebelled against the idea.”

It took several nights before Stephan Kovalski could accept the experience
of listening to Sabia’s cries and several more for him to listen to them
not only with his ears but also with his heart. He was torn between his
religious faith and his very human feelings of revolt. Had he any right to
be happy, to sing praises to God while that intolerable torment was going
on right next to him? Every night when his young neighbor began to groan
again, he emptied himself and prayed. Then he ceased to hear the tears,
the cries, the noises; he ceased to notice the rustle of the rats in the
darkness; he no longer smelled the stench of the blocked drain outside
his door. He entered into what he described as a state of“weightlessness."

“1n the beginning my prayer was exclusively concerned with young
Sabia's agony. I begged the Lord to alleviate his suffering, to lessen his
sacrifice. And if, in his judgment, this trial was really useful for the
redemption of the sins of mankind, then I asked him, the Father who had
not hesitated to sacrifice his own son, to let me assume a part of it, to
let me suffer instead of that child." Night after night, his eyes turned
in the darkness toward the picture of the Sacred Shroud, Stephan Kovalski
prayed until the groans were still. Tirelessly he prayed and pleaded：
“You who died on the Cross to save mankind, help me to understand the
mystery of suffering. Help me to transcend it. Help me, above all, to
fight against its causes, against the lack of love, against hatred and
against all the injustices that give rise to it.”

The illness of his young neighbor grew worse and the sounds ofhis agony
increased. One morning the priest caught the bus to the nearest hospital.

“I need a syringe and a dose of morphine. It’s very urgent," he said to
the attendant in charge ofthe hospital pharmacy, handing him thirty rupees.

“Since his illness was incurable and my prayer had proved abortive,"
he would later say to justify himself, “Sabia should at least be able
to die in peace.”

Helped by her three daughters, aged eleven, eight, and five, Sabia’s
mother spent her days squatting in the alleyway, making paper bags out
of old newspapers. She was a widow and this activity represented the only
income with which she could support her family. A hundred times a day she
had to get up and clear everything out of the way to allow a cycle-car
or cart to pass. Yet Stephan Kovalski had noticed that her smile never
deserted her.

Hostile gazes beset him as soon as he stopped outside Sabia‘s hovel. Why
did this infidel want to visit the little Muslim who was dying." Was he
going to try to convert the boy to his religion? Tell him that Allah was
not the true God? There were many in the area who mistrusted the priest. So
many stories were told about the zeal of Christian missionaries, about
their diabolical capacity to wheedle their way in anywhere. Wasn't it
merely to reduce their vigilance that this particular one wore trousers
and sneakers instead ofa cassock? Nevertheless, Sabia's mother welcomed
him with her remarkable smile. She sent her eldest daughter to fetch him
a cup oftea from the old Hindu and invited the priest to come in. The
smell of putrid flesh caused him to hesitate for a few seconds on the
threshold. Then he plunged into the half-light.

The little Muslim boy was lying on a mattress of rags, his arms crossed,
his skin pitted with sores, crawling with lice, his knees halfbent
back over his Heshless torso. Stephan Kovalski drew nearer to him and
the boy opened his eyes. His gaze lit up with a spark of joy. Kovalski
was totally overwhelmed. “How could I believe my own eyes." How could
so much serenity radiate from that little martyred frame?" His fingers
tightened on the vial of morphine.

“Salaam. Sabin,” he murmured, smiling.

“Salaam, Daddu/z,” responded the child cheerfully. “What have you
got in your hand? Sweets?”

Startled, Stephan Kovalski dropped the vial which shattered as it
fell. “Sabia had no need of morphine. His features were imbued with a
peace that quite disarmed me. Bruised, mutilated, crucified as he was,
he remained undefeated. He had just given me the most precious gift of
all： a secret reason never to despair, a light in the darkness.”
