---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 624
Tags:
  - Life-Love=Love=God's Love for Us
  - Sacrifice-Death=Sacrifice and Suffering=The Divine Allopathy
  - Life-Love=Love=Our Love for God
  - Combat-Action=Work, Action and Society=Act and Essence
By: Eckhart
---
Here the body is bold and strong for here it is at home; the world helps it,
the earth is its fatherland, it is helped by all its kindred; food, drink,
ease -- all are opposed to spirit. The spirit is an alien here, in heaven are
its kindred, its whole race; there dwell its loved ones.  To succour the spirit
in its distress and to impede the flesh somewhat in this strife lest it conquer
the spirit, we put upon it the bridle of penitential practices to curb it, so
that the spirit can control it. This is done to bring it to subjection; but to
conquer and curb it a thousand times better, put thou upon it the bridle of
love. With love thou overcomest it most surely, with love thou loadest it most
heavily. God lies in wait for us therefore with nothing so much as with love.
For love is like the fisherman’s hook. To the fisherman falls no fish that is
not caught on his hook. Once it takes the hook the fish is forfeit to the
fisherman; in vain it twists hither and thither, the fisherman is certain of
his catch. And so I say of love; he who is caught thereby has the strongest of
all bonds and yet a pleasant burden. He who bears this sweet burden fares
further, gets nearer therewith than by using any harshness possible to man.
Moreover, he can cheerfully put up with whatever befalls, cheerfully suffer
what God inflicts. Naught makes thee so much God nor God so much thine own as
this sweet bond. He who has found this way will seek no other. He who hangs on
this hook is so fast caught that foot and hand, mouth, eyes and heart and all
that is man’s is bound to be God’s. ... Who is caught in this net, who walks in
this way, whatsoever he works is wrought by love, whose alone the work is; busy
or idle it matters nothing. Such an one’s most trivial action is more
profitable, his meanest occupation is more fruitful to himself and other people
and to God is better pleasing than the cumulative works of other men, who,
though free from mortal sin, are yet inferior to him in love. He rests more
usefully than others labour.

Await thou therefore this hook, so thou be happily caught, and the more surely
caught so much the more surely freed.

That we may be thus caught and freed, help us O thou who art love itself.
