---
Tags:
  - Revelation=wakening the Great Mother
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 228
  Source:
    Title: States of Grace
By: Charlene Spretnak
---
Since the divine is understood to be immanent (dynamic creativity in
the cosmic unfolding) as well as transcendent (as the sacred whole, or
ultimate mystery), one approaches spiritual practice in this orientation
as an awakening of possibilities. Engagement with myth and symbol, as
participatory fields of relation rather than fixed artifacts, suggests a
shaping of our continuity and groundedness while evoking a sense of our
larger self, the fullness of our being. It is the aesthetic path to grace.

Many who follow this path assemble a home altar bearing symbols of the
Goddess. It may be no more than a shelf in a bookcase covered with a cloth
on which stand Goddess figurines, shells, stones, or other gifts of the
Earthbody, but its affective power is remarkable. Even a passing glance
at the symbolic forms of the Goddess reminds a woman that she is heir to
a lineage of deeply grounded wisdom and inner strength and a weaver of
the sacred whole. Sarasvati stands sensually poised on a lotus blossom,
playing a sitar as She guides knowledge and the arts. Our Lady of Guadalupe
stands on a crescent moon, clothed in a blue robe of the starry heavens
and radiating a full-body aura of golden light. Yemaya, mother of the sea,
the great womb ofcreation, stands draped in blue and white, a beautiful,
dark woman of deep mystery. Quan Yin, smooth and serene, dispenses from
her open hands the vast power of compassion. On many women’s altars
“the little snake Goddesses ofCrete,” their names long lost, stand
as we moderns never could have imagined： planted firmly on the earth,
baring breasts proudly, their outstretched arms hold writhing serpents,
symbols of shedding and growth in endless regeneration. We sustain the
mythic presence of the Goddess in our lives as She evokes our creativity
and depth.
