---
Tags:
  - Revelation=wakening the Great Mother
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 220-222
  Source:
    Title: Going Too Far - The Personal Chronicles of a Feminist
Title: Metaphysical Feminism
By: Robin Morgan
---
The sea organisms crawled up onto the land to commit ecstatic suicide,
to escape triumphantly from existing, to return to infinite pure energy,
motionless.

But life forced itself to flow through even the gasps they drank in
of what they assumed was death： air. Despite themselves, they became
airbreathing organisms. Every step taken toward nonexisting brings us
closer toward existing.

It is the fault of something female.

Nature, we have heard, abhors a vacuum. Speaking then through male anguish
at his own womb envy, nature discovered existential despair. But male
anguish expressed this despair as misogyny. What else to feel when faced
with this female endless birthing, this repeated insistence on life and
life-giving and life-re-creation? What is this maddening tendency to bear
and bear and bear, as if each woman were somehow somewhere in herself
singing “I never met a universe I didn't like”?

He only wants her to understand his wretchedness. He persecutes her to
make her understand why death is the answer, he tortures her to raise her
consciousness to the suicidal, to make her as truly aware as he is. She
won’t despair. She won’t die. She creates agriculture, domesticates
animals. Culture is born.

He appropriates her gods, her whole cosmic space, to the merciless,
negative, bleak, terror-filled void in which he is trapped. She curses
his gods-but does not die. She calls to him. She sees his beauty writhing,
contorted in pain. He sobs with longing to share what she is, sees, owns,
the whole Earth as female, the solar system female, the universe female, all
that he smells and touches and which holds him and bore him and will outlive
him -- female, eternally rutting and conceiving and laughing and producing.

For what? What is there to celebrate here, in this dimension? Is there no
way to kill her out of this gross procreation? Can none ofhis entropy conquer
her energy? If he cannot stop her, can he at least successfully pretend
that he insists she do precisely what she is doing? Can he tell himself
he demands she conceive? Rape is born, his own parthenogenetic child. Laws
are written controlling her body’s freedom. She creates pottery, baskets,
songs. She investigates the power of herbs. Art and science are born.

Is there no way to stop her? Is there no way to evade this inexhaustible
deathless pursuing consciousness? He devises nirvanas of escape. Oriental
philosophies which pretend she is illusion, Occidental philosophies which
pretend she is existentially meaningless. And all the while she smiles
and conceives. Children. Grapefruits. The thimble. Barnacles. The printing
press. City squirrels.

He is more and more trapped into his systems. He invents new and efficient
ways of murdering what she produces -- wars, chemicals, political systems
which destroy her creations or treat them as products. He is consumed
with self-loathing for having become the weapon of himself and never the
victim in his global attempt to commit suicide. She weeps for him and
gives birth to a new star, hoping its nova will divert him from his misery.

He invents names for her creatures, deliberately mixed around. He calls
the human ones insects, vermin, pigs, cows. Then he kills them, and their
animal namesakes, too. He forgets what and who and why he is killing. He
knows only where he came from -- that womb of Earth, and where he is
going -- that same insatiable womb with its infinite capacity for orgasm
and for creation as it sucks him in and speWS him out and laughs lovingly
lovingly at him as if he were her plaything.

Only when he has totally forgotten who he is and why he hates her so;
only when she herself has almost forgotten herself; only when his pain
has at last infected her so that she almost has begun to listen, almost
understand his message of nonexistence, his longing for peace and death and
the silence of a collapsed nonwomb whose energy and matter are once and for
all time separated -- only then does she slowly rouse herself to remind him.

That time is now.
