---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 323-324
  Source:
    Title: The Seat of the Soul
By: Gary Zukav
---
Evil needs to be understood for what it is： the dynamic of the absence
of Light. It is not something that one should prepare to battle, to run
from or to outlaw. Understanding evil as the absence of Light automatically
requires that we reach for this thing called Light.

Conscious Light is equal to Divinity, to Divine Intelligence. Where there
is an absence of Divine Intelligence, that darkness itselfmaneuvers. It
is simply that there is darkness, and we stumble in the darkness. The
existence in darkness is not permanent. Every soul will eventually be fully
enLightened. A soul with no Light will always come to know Light because
there is so much assistance provided to each soul at all times. There is
much Light, as we shall see, that is continually surrounding such a soul
even though it may not be able to directly penetrate it, and there is much
assistance for souls that insist upon living in darkness. The encouragement
to take even one thought into Light is always available. Eventually,
they always do.

Understanding that evil is the absence of Light does not mean that it is
inappropriate to respond to evil.

What is the appropriate response to evil?

The remedy for an absence is a presence. Evil is an absence and,
therefore, it cannot be healed with an absence. By hating evil, or one
who is engaged in evil, you contribute to the absence of Light and not
to its presence. Hatred of evil does not diminish evil, it increases it.

The absence of Light causes the personality to suffer. There is pain. When
you hate, you bring the same suffering upon yourself. Hatred of evil
affects the one who hates. It makes him or her a hateful person, a person
who also has absented himselfor herself from Light.

Understanding evil as the absence of Light does not require becoming
passive, or disregarding evil actions or evil behavior. Ifyou see a
child being abused, or a people being oppressed, for example, it is
appropriate that you do what you can to protect the child, or to aid
the people, but ifthere is not compassion in your heart also for those
who abuse and oppress -- for those who have no compassion -- do you not
become like them? Compassion is being moved to and by acts of the heart,
to and by the energy of love. If you strike without compassion against
the darkness, you yourselfenter the darkness.

Understanding that evil is the absence of Light challenges the perception
of power as external. Can an absence be defeated? An evil person can be
arrested, but can evil be arrested? An evil group can be imprisoned, but
can evil be imprisoned." A compassionate heart is more effective against
evil than an army. An army can engage another army, but it cannot engage
evil. A compassionate heart can engage evil directly -- it can bring
Light where there was no Light.

Understanding evil as the absence of Light requires you to examine the
choices that you make each moment in terms of whether they move you toward
Light or away from it. It allows you to look with compassion upon those
who engage in evil activities, even as you challenge their activities,
and thus protects you from the creation of negative karma. It permits
you to see that the place to begin the task ofeliminating evil is within
yourself. This is the appropriate response to evil.
