---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 434-435
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation=The False Light
  - 242
  - 394
By: Bernard Gui
Commentary: The principal heresy of the Waldensians was contempt for
  ecclesiastical authority. This passage is given at length because it
  typifies a perversion of mind and soul which is not at all confined to
  this particular sect.  As regards the taking of oaths. Bernard E.
  Jones writes in his Freemasons' Guide and Compendium (London. Harrap.
  1950). p. 280： 'There have been outstanding Quaker members of the
  Craft'： and the presence of this sect (otherwise opposed to all
  ritual) in Irish. English and American Lodges has in fact brought the
  controversy of oath versus affirmation into a rather specialized
  milieu. ...
---
Also, (the Waldensians) hold and teach that all oaths, whether in
justice or otherwise, without exception and explanation, are forbidden
by God, and illicit and sinful, interpreting thus in an excessive and
unreasonable sense the words of the holy Gospel and of St James the
Apostle against swearing. Nevertheless, the swearing of oaths is
lawful and obligatory for the purpose of declaring the truth in
justice, according not only to the same doctrine of the saints and
doctors of the Church and the tradition of the same holy Catholic
Church, but also to the decree of the Church published against the
aforesaid error： ‘If any of these should reject the religious
obligation of taking an oath by a damnable superstition, and should
refuse to swear, from this fact they may be considered heretics.’

It should be known, however, that these Waldensians give themselves
dispensations in the matter of taking oaths; they have the right to
swear an oath to avoid death for themselves or for another, and also
in order not to betray their fellows, or reveal the secret of their
sect. For they say that it is an inexpiable crime and a sin against
the Holy Ghost to betray a ‘perfect’ member of their sect.

Also, from this same fount of error, the said sect and heresy declares
that all judgment is forbidden by God. and consequently is sinful, and
that any judge violates this prohibition of God, who in whatever case
and for whatever cause sentences a man to corporal punishment, or to a
penalty of blood, or to death. In this, they apply, without the
necessary explanation, the words of the holy Gospel where it is
written; ‘Judge not. that ye be not judged,’ and ‘Thou shalt not
kill.’ and other similar texts; they do not understand these or know
either their meaning or their interpretation, as the holy Roman Church
wisely understands them and transmits them to the faithful according
to the doctrines of the fathers and doctors, and the decisions of
canon law. ...

It should be known that it is exceedingly difficult to interrogate and
examine the Waldensians, and to get the truth about their errors from
them, because of the deception and duplicity with which they answer
questions in order not to be caught.. . . This is the way they do it.
When one of them is arrested and brought for examination, he appears
undaunted, and as if he were secure and conscious of no evil in
himself. When he is ásked if he knows why he has been arrested, he
answers very sweetly and with a smile, ‘My lord, I should be glad to
learn the reason from you.’ Asked about the faith which he holds and
believes, he answers, ‘I believe everything that a good Christian
ought to believe.’ Questioned as to whom he considers a good
Christian, he replies, ‘He who believes as Holy Church teaches him to
believe.’ When he is asked what he means by ‘Holy Church’, he answers,
‘My lord, that which you say and believe is the Holy Church.’ If you
say to him, ‘I believe that the Holy Church is the Roman Church, over
which the lord pope rules, and under him, the prelates,’ he replies,
‘I believe it,’ meaning that he believes that you believe it. ...

When he is questioned concerning this deception and many others like
it, and asked to answer explicitly and directly, he replies, ‘If you
will not interpret what I say simply and sanely, then I do not know
how I should answer you. I am a simple and illiterate man. Do not try
to ensnare me in my words.’ If you say to him, ‘If you are a simple
man. answer simply, without dissimulation,’ he says. ‘Willingly.’
