---
Tags:
  - Revelation=wakening the Great Mother
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 223-224
  Source:
    Title: Addiction to Perfection
By: Marion Woodman
---
The unconscious per se is unknowable; it is a reality that is inferred
from such things as spontaneous or involuntary body movement and
dreams. Ultimately we may come to think of body movement or the dreaming
state as a manifestation not of unconsciousness, but as a consciousness that
operates upon us and within us. Certainly there are many who believe that
what We now think of as the unconscious is equivalent to the traditional
concept of God as an unsleeping Being within, an omniscient inner
presence. Similarly, I speak of Sophia or of the Virgin because they
are divine womanly beings associated with the feminine side of God. By
locating them in the unconscious I am following the path of God from
without to within, the path that characterizes the movement ofconsciousness
itself. Moreover, I am suggesting that what we now call the unconscious is in
psychological reality a consciousness that has simply been underground for
too long. In alchemy there is the concept of the dam absconditur (male), the
hidden god in matter. But the unconscious also includes the dea abscondita,
the Black Madonna, the goddess who has chosen to hide herself in order to
protect humanity from the devastating consequences of killing her.

Modern society, far more than we realize, is the offspring of Nietzsche’s
declaration, “God is dead." He is not dead, nor is the Goddess. They
are merely hiding. Their hiding place is the unconscious. When it
is no longer necessary for them to hide in order to protect man from
destroying himself by destroying them, they, God and Goddess together,
will re-emerge. And when they do we will see the unconscious for what it
is： God’s consciousness of his creation, which includes the body's
consciousness ofitself. That movement Nietzsche identified with Dionysus.

The return of God is one of the most ancient expectations of the human
race. Every world religion has presented itself as preparing for his
return. Every religion still awaits it. What does this expectation imply? We
already know God in his outward manifestation, by his laws, his commands,
his word. That is the Logos, the masculine side of God. What we await in the
Second Coming is what we lack： God’s inner dynamic or process. This --
God in his creativeness rather than in his creation -- is the essence of
the feminine, traditionally enacted in the ancient Mysteries. The return
is therefore the emergence of the feminine side of God, which has been
gradually taking shape for centuries in what we call the unconscious. The
time has now come when we can deal creatively with the concept of God as
the union of opposites, and therefore see the feminine no longer darkly
through a masculine glass, but face to androgynous face.
