---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Mary
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 237-245
  Source:
    Title: The Story of Mary
By: Graham Greene
Title: The Conflict Round the Dogma
---
There is one saint in the calendar ofthe Church who has never been associated
with the idea of punishment： even justice is alien to her, compared with
the ideas ofmercy and love. She is the one whom Catholics know as Our Lady.

Yet it is around this figure that the bitterest conflict has always been
waged. No statues in Puritan England were more certain to be destroyed
than hers, and the same was true in Spain in the 19305. Ministers in their
pulpits may question the divinity of Christ and cause no stir outside a few
country rectories-but when the doctrine of the Assumption, which has been
established as a feast of the Church for more than 1,000 years, is defined
as a dogma, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York claim that the division
of Christendom has been widened. They believe in the Resurrection of the
dead-but to suggest that an actual resurrection has already taken place
seems to them blasphemous. No storm was raised when, a hundred years ago,
Newman wrote： “Original sin had not been found in her, by the wear
of her senses, and the waste of her frame and the decrepitude of years,
propagating death. She died, but her death was a mere fact, not an effect;
and, when it was over, it ceased to be.” Temporally there were other
issues： the Protestant churches were worried by the idea of evolution,
even the age of the earth was a cause of scandal because it was believed
to contradict Genesis. But the conflict of science and religion always
passes sooner or later： what remains is this mysterious savage war
around the only figure of perfect human love.

What is the explanation? One theologian has explained it, for
our generation, as a distrust of the concrete. We are so used to
abstractions. Words like Democracy and Liberty can be used in quite
opposite senses without arousing attention： they go in and out of our
cars like air. So with religious belief. The Supreme Being, the Trinity,
the Creator of all things, such phrases may once have excited thought, but
they do so no longer. Even the concrete name Christ has become so diluted,
into the Great Teacher, the First Communist, and the like, that only a
small amount of opposition is raised by the idea that Christ is God --
it is rather like saying Truth is God. But the statement that Mary is
the Mother of God remains something shocking, paradoxical, physical.

But it is from that statement that all Christianity springs. To quote
Newman again, “When once we have mastered the idea, that Mary bore,
suckled, and handled the Eternal in the form ofa child, what limit
is conceivable to the rush and flood of thoughts which such a doctrine
involves?" The flood of thoughts may sometimes have taken bizarre channels,
but the Church is slow and careful： tales are allowed plenty of time
to wither of themselves, and there is surely small sign of impetuosity in
the proclamation in 1854 of the Immaculate Conception, which was already
part of the accepted teaching of the Church, in the East and the West
and in Africa, within a few years of the death of St. John. As for the
Assumption, which even unguided human logic might detect as an essential
effect of the Immaculate Conception, the Church has waited longer still.

Our opponents sometimes claim that no belief should be held dogmatically
which is not explicitly stated in scripture (ignoring that it is only on
the authority ofthe Church we recognise certain Gospels and not others
as true). But the Protestant churches have themselves accepted such
dogmas as the Trinity for which there is no such precise authority in the
Gospels. St. [ohn wrote, “There is much else besides that Jesus did;
if all of it were put in writing I do not think the world itself would
contain the books which would have to be written”; and it is our claim
that Tradition alone -- founded on the Apostles’ teaching, analysed and
reflected on through the ages by the Church, under the guidance of the
Holy Spirit promised by Christ -- illumines the full and true meaning of
the Scriptures.

From the Scriptures themselves we know very little of Our Lady beyond the
first appalling facts ofthe Annunciation and the Virgin Birth. St. Luke’s
Gospel is sometimes known as Our Lady's, for St. Luke gives details of
the Visitation and the Birth that could only have come from Mary’s
account of them. St. Matthew’s Gospel complements his account with
the Flight into Egypt, St. John, with whom, so tradition declares,
she spent the remainder of her life after the Crucifixion, tells us how
Christ performed for her His first miracle at the wedding feast ofCana,
how she stood at the foot of the Cross and how Christ entrusted her to
the disciple whom He loved. From the Acts we learn that she was present
with the Apostles in the upper room at Pentecost, and afterwards there
is complete silence -- a few legends, that is all. “Her departure made
no noise in the world,” Newman wrote. “The Church went about her
common duties, preaching, converting, suffering; there were persecutions,
there was fleeing from place to place, there were martyrs, there were
triumphs; at length the rumour spread abroad that the Mother of God
was no longer upon earth. Pilgrims went to and fro; they sought for her
relics, but they found them not; did she die at Ephesus? or did she die
at Jerusalem? Reports varied： but her tomb could not be pointed out,
or ifit was found it was open."

The Empty Tomb

Legend tells how the Apostles were suddenly gathered together round her
deathbed, how they buried her and on the third day found her tomb empty,
but the dogma of the Assumption does not demand that we should believe
these details ofher end. We are only asked to believe what the Church
in historical memory has always believed, that, just as in her case
the taint oforiginal sin was never allowed to touch her (“out tainted
nature's solitary boast," Wordsworth wrote), so the corruption of the
body, which we believe is the effect oforiginal sin, never occurred;
she is soul and glorified body (whatever that may be) in heaven (wherever
that can be found).

Scripture, tradition, legend -- all these contribute either to our knowledge
of Mary or to our knowledge of how men regarded her. In her case, unlike
that ofany other saint, there is another source; she alone has consistently,
throughout history up to the present day, appeared to men. There has been an
undrying How of visions： she is a woman ofa hundred geographical titles--
Lourdes, La Salette, Carmel, Fatima, Guadalupe, Lima. The Church has never
demanded that we should believe in any of these visions as an article of
faith. Some of the visions, just as some of the legends, the Church has
even condemned. Those regarded as worthy of credence are not confined
to one continent or one race. Some go back beyond the period of proper
investigation, like that ofOur Lady ofWalsingham in England whose shrine
was visited barefoot one snowbound winter by Henry VIII and was afterwards
destroyed by the same king's henchmen. The legend tells us that Our Lady
appeared to a noble widow and commanded her to build a shrine after the
style of her own house in Nazareth. The work went awry. During one night
therefore Our Lady built the house herselfwith the help ofangels. Ofcourse
we need give no credence to the legend as it has come down to us, but the
persistence and purity of the devotion round this shrine -- a devotion
that touched even the sceptical Erasmus-which continues today in the
pilgrimages to the restored shrine, suggests at least the possibility of
some genuine vision behind the myth. Can one write so beautifully about
a lie as the anonymous 16th century author of the Lament over Walsingham?
  Bitter bitter Oh to behold the grass to grow
  Where the walls of Walsingham so stately did show;
  Such were the works of Walsingham while she did stand：
  Such are the wrecks as now do show of that holy land.
  Level level with the ground the towers do lie
  Which with their golden glittering tops pierced once to the sky. ...
  Weep weep O Walsingham whose days and nights,
  Blessings turned to blasphemies, holy deeds to dispites.
  Sin is where Our Lady sat, Heaven turned to Hell,
  Satan sits where Our Lord did sway, Walsingham O farewell.

If the origin of Walsingham goes back into those deep medieval shadows that
contrast with the clarity and lucidity of the primitive age, the vision of
the Virgin of Guadalupe is established almost as exactly as the 19th century
visions of Lourdes and La Salette, or the 20th century vision of Fatima. It
was on Dec. 9, 1531, that Our Lady appeared to an Indian peasant called
Juan Diego as he was climbing Tepayac Hill at the foot of which the shrine
now stands, close to Mexico City. She told the Indian to carry a message
to Bishop Zumarraga, that he was to build a shrine on the spot where she
might watch and guard the Indians. Only two years before Mexico had fallen
finally to Cortez, the country was not yet subdued, and the average Spanish
adventurer would have given small welcome to an Indian peasant who said
he had been addressed as “my child" by the Mother of God. Zumarraga
himself refused to credit the story, and when the Virgin appeared again
to the Indian at the same place, he asked her to send a Spaniard with her
message whom the Bishop would trust. But the Virgin sent him back and this
time the Bishop asked for a sign. For the third time Diego listened to the
Virgin, who told him to return next day and she would give him the sign
for which the Bishop asked. But next day Diego’s uncle was very ill and
he forgot -- or more likely the immediatefact of the dying man seemed more
important, more true, than a vision he may himself have discounted when the
Bishop talked full of the wisdom and the slowness and the sane scepticism
of the Church authority. On Tuesday, December 12, Diego had to return to
Tlaltelolco to fetch a priest for his dying uncle, but he was afraid ofthat
particular stony path he associated with his vision and took a different
way. But he could not escape so easily. The Virgin blocked his new path
too. She told him his uncle was already well and directed him to go to
the top of the hill and gather roses from the rocks. He did as bidden,
presenting the roses to Our Lady who, having touched them, returned them
to him to take to the Bishop. Diego wrapped them in his serape, and when
he opened it before Zumarraga the image ofthe Virgin was stamped on the
cloth, just as it hangs above Guadalupe altar today.

I have described this vision in some detail because the legend, we are told
by Mexican politicians, was invented by the Church to enslave the Indian
mind. Their argument is a difficult one, for this Virgin, two years after
the conquest, was claiming a church for the protection of her Indians from
the Spanish conqueror. The legend gave the Indian self-respect： if it
was a legend, it was a liberating and not an enslaving one. What would have
been the future of the vision if it had been sent to the conqueror and not
to the conquered? A rich shrine would have been built, and eventually it
would have been closed like other churches during the persecution of the
19205. This shrine, because it was Indian, remained open and helped to
break the career of the only man who threatened it. When Garrido Canabal,
the dictator of Tabasco, arrived in the capital with his private army of
Red Shirts to take his seat as minister of agriculture in Cardenas’
cabinet, he gave secret orders that the shrine was to be destroyed by
dynamite. But the orders became known and the Indians guarded the shrine
night and day until eventually Garrido, who had so successfully eliminated
every church in Tabasco, was driven into exile.

The Virgin oquadalupe has the features ofan Indian. We know nothing ofa
resurrected body save that it has substance (St. Thomas put his hand
in Our Lord’s wounds) and yet can pass through the wall of a room,
that Christ after His resurrection was sometimes recognised immediately
by the disciples and yet sometimes could walk beside them unknown. The
Virgin appeared to Bernadette as a girl little older than herself, to
the children of Fatima as a woman, to an Indian as an Indian.

While many cases of reported visions will never even reach the stage of
Church investigation, others are investigated and condemned. Two years
ago a case so condemned was that of the moving statue in Assisi. The
stone statue stands above the main door of the Church of Santa Maria
degli Angeli at the foot of Assisi hill. One night somebody noticed that
the statue seemed to breathe and move her arms. The story spread rapidly
and at weekends thousands would come to see the “miracle.” When I went
with a companion it was in the middle of the week and only a small group
stood in the forecourt singing and praying. But there were two busloads
of pilgrims from towns nearby, who sat in their buses eating sandwiches
and hard-boiled eggs and occasionally dipping their heads to take a look
at the statue through the windows -- a miracle from a Pullman seat. My
companion and I were both sceptics, but from the first glance we took the
statue seemed to move, sometimes the breast, sometimes the hands, sometimes
the whole statue seemed on the point of toppling into the square. It was
probably, we thought, the movement of our own heads that produced the
illusion, so we lay flat on our backs on the gravel and shut our eyes and
rested them. We opened our eyes and immediately the statue breathed and
moved above us. The illusion may have been caused by the bright lights of
the halo. In any case the “miracle” was a little too timely, for the
elections were only a few weeks off. After the bishop’s condemnation
the pilgrimages would soon have ceased if the Communist mayor of Assisi
had left well enough alone. But he came down to the church and attacked
Our Lady in an address to the crowd and had a paralytic stroke then and
there. Even with that assistance the legend is dying out. Its death is
one more support for the legends that do not die. We are forced to ask
ourselves： is there any explanation but that some are true."

In spite of the miracles of Lourdes, attested by a sceptic like Zola and a
scientist like Alexis Carrel, we are apt to think of this an an unmiraculous
age. The miracles of Lourdes are cures -- we can persuade ourselves that
science will one day explain them (Carrel, who witnessed the instantaneous
cure ofa girl dying of tubercular peritonitis, tried unsuccessfully to
persuade himself that his diagnosis had been at fault). But this is an
age of visions as well as cures： ifwe are entering a new Dark Age we are
being given the same consolations as our ancestors. Since the defeat of the
Turks at Lepanto the battle for Christianity has never been more critical,
and sometimes it seems as though the supernatural were gathering its
forces for our support, and whom should we expect in the vanguard but Our
Lady? For the attack on the Son has always come through the Mother. She is
the keystone of Christian doctrine. If you wish to discredit the divinity
of Christ you discredit the Virgin Birth; if you wish to discredit the
manhood of Christ you discredit the motherhood of Our Lady.

One vision which is likely to be regarded as credible by the Church (let me
emphasise again that no Catholic is bound to believe even in the vision of
St. Bernadette, for a Saint can be deceived) is that of the Tre Fontane,
a cave on a hillside near Rome opposite a Trappist monastery that is
said to be the scene ofSt. Paul’s execution. Now a rough path made by
pilgrims runs along the slope of the hill among the low eucalyptus trees
to a small clearing and a cave sparkling with votive offerings. Cripples
sell candles along the way, and when I was last there dozens of children
from a war orphanage, each child without a leg or an arm, were helping
each other across the clearing to where women knelt and scooped into their
handkerchiefs the earth they believed had been pressed by Mary's feet. On
April I2, 1947, a Roman bus inspector, Bruno Cornacchiola, a Communist and
renegade Catholic, was walking in these woods with his three children：
he was preparing a speech attacking the title of the Mother ofGod. His
children called to him to help them find their ball. “I went over,”
he said. “What do I see? Gianfranco on his knees at the entrance to
the grotto, his hands joined. I-Ie murmurs, ‘Beautiful lady, beautiful
lady.’ I call Isola. ‘Come here. What is your brother saying? What is
there in there?’ ‘It’s nothing,’ says the child and at the same
moment there she is on the ground in the same attitude, saying the same
words as Gianfranco. I understand nothing. ‘Carlo, tell me what is this
and what are you playing at?’ ‘I don’t know,’ replies the child,
and there he is on his knees too. ‘Beautiful lady, beautiful lady,’
he says. I am astounded, and it is as though two hands are passed over
my eyes; a veil has fallen. A great light illuminates the grotto, and in
the middle there appears ... "

Message to Bernadette

I quote no more because, as so often in such cases, the human description
of the vision becomes unreal, stilted, academic. (We judge its authenticity
partly by its effect on the family concerned.) If St. John of the Cross
fails to convey his vision, how can a child or a bus inspector convey
theirs? They are forced back on trite words, pious phrases, “I am She
who lies in the bosom ofthe Divine Trinity," and the like. To me almost
the only convincing words any ofthese visions have spoken were those
reported by the child Bernadette. There had been many sermons and much
talk on the new dogma of the Immaculate Conception and she had no idea
ofits meaning, until that girl of about her own age appeared to her in
the Pyrenean cave and explained, “I am the Immaculate Conception,” as
much as to say, “This doctrine of the Second Eve which theologians have
been discussing for 1,600 years is as simple as that -- it is me, whom you
know, that’s all.” We can look for no enlargements of knowledge from
these Visions. But there is a common feature in all her appearances, the
appeal for prayer and yet more prayer. Her message is as simple as that,
and it may seem unimportant unless we have some realisation of the terrible
force of prayer, the mysterious untapped power able to move mountains.

What a strange distance, like a stellar space, cold and incomprehensible,
separates the child Bernadette or the boy Francesco at Fatima from
indignant theologians who deplore the dogma of the Assumption as “an
added difficulty to reunion” of all Christian churches. It may be “a
difficulty,” but these children have seen the glorified body, and you will
not persuade them to suppress their vision because it is tactless, because
it may offend a few dignitaries ofan alien faith. Ifthe dogma had not been
proclaimed now it would still one day have been proclaimed. The Church has
waited nearly twelve hundred years since the feast of the Assumption was
appointed by the Synod ofSalzburg in 800, and the Synod had waited several
centuries since the first written reference to the common belief. We might
have waited another thousand years, but the Church has decided otherwise.

It is legitimate, of course, to speculate why this precise moment in history
has been chosen. I can write only as an uninstructed Catholic. Because
the doctrines ofChrist’s nature as God and Man are walled about by
the doctrine of the Annunciation and the Virgin Birth, so that it is not
too much to say that the whole of Christianity to this day lies in Our
Lady’s womb, it is to her that recourse has always been had in times
of crisis. So it was through all the terrible storms of the 16th century
when the Turks seemed on the point of conquering Europe： appropriately
Pius V instituted the feast day of the Most Holy Rosary in thanksgiving
for the great victory of Lepanto. And now, when a yet heavier threat lies
upon our borders, perhaps the proclamation of the new dogma will help
the devotion of millions. Devotion means simply an expression of love,
and if we love enough, even in human terms, we gain courage.

This would be no argument, of course, for proclaiming a novel belief,
but a dogma is only a definition of an old belief. It restricts the area
oftruth at the expense oflegend or heresy, and the greatest definitions
of the Church, accepted alike by Protestants and Catholics -- the nature
of Christ, the doctrine of the Trinity -- were definitions drawn up to
exclude heresies within the Church itself.

In our day there are no obvious signs of heretical beliefs within the Church
concerning the Assumption of Our Lady and therefore it was believed by
some Catholics that to proclaim the dogma was unnecessary. But Catholics
today cannot remain quite untouched by the general heresy of our time,
the unimportance ofthe individual. Today the human body is regarded as
expendable material, something to be eliminated wholesale by the atom bomb,
a kind of anonymous carrion. After the First World War, crosses marked the
places where the dead lay, allied and enemy： lights burned continually
in the capitals of Europe over the graves of the unknown warriors. But
no crosses today mark the common graves into which the dead of London
and Berlin were shovelled, and Hiroshima's memorial is the outline of
a body photographed by the heat flash on asphalt. The definition of the
Assumption proclaims again the doctrine of our Resurrection, the eternal
destiny of each human body, and again it is the history of Mary which
maintains the doctrine in its clarity. The Resurrection of Christ can
be regarded as the Resurrection ofa God, but the Resurrection of Mary
foreshadows the Resurrection of each one of us.
