---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 93-96
  Source:
    Title: The Heart of Matter
By: Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
Title: The Picture
---
At that time, he began, my mind was concerned with a problem that was half
philosophic and halfaesthetic. Suppose, I used to think, that Christ should
deign to appear here, in the flesh, before my very eyes -- what would he
look like? Most important of all, in what way would he fit himself into
Matter and so be sensibly apprehended? How would he impinge on the objects
around him? And I felt that there was something vaguely distressing,
something that grated on me, in the idea that the Body of the Lord could
be jostled in the world-scene by the multitude of inferior bodies without
the latter’s noticing or recognizing by some perceptible change the
Intensity that brushed against them.

Meanwhile, my eyes had unconsciously come to rest on a picture that
represented Christ with his I-Ieart offered to men. This picture was
hanging in front of me, on the wall of a church into which I had gone to
pray. And, continuing my line of thought, I could not see how it could be
possible for an artist to represent the sacred Humanity oflesus without
giving him this overexact physical definition, which seemed to cut him
off from all other men： without giving him a face whose expression was
too individual a beautiful face, no doubt, but beautiful in a particular
way which excluded all other types of beauty.

I was worrying and wondering about all this; and I was still looking at
the picture when the vision began.

(Indeed, I cannot be certain exactly when it began, because it had already
reached a certain pitch ofintensity when I became aware of it. ... )

All I know is that as I let my eyes roam over the outlines of the picture,
I suddenly realized that they were melting. They were melting, but in
a very special way that I find it difficult to describe. When I tried
to distinguish the drawing of the Person of Christ, the lines seemed to
be sharply defined. And then, ifI relaxed my visual concentration, the
whole of Christ's outline, the folds of his robe, the bloom of his skin,
merged (though without disappearing) into all the rest.

You might have said that the edge which divided Christ from the surrounding
World was changing into a layer of vibration in which all distinct
delimitation was lost.

As I remember it, the change must first have been noticeable in a particular
spot on the edge of the picture; it started there, and then ran all round
the outline of the figure -- it was in that order, at any rate, that
I became aware of it. And then, after that, the metamorphosis spread
rapidly and included every detail.

First I noticed that the vibrant atmosphere which formed a halo around
Christ was not confined to a narrow strip encircling him, but radiated into
Infinity. From time to time what seemed to be trails of phosphorescence
streamed across it, in which could be seen a continuous pulsing surge
which reached out to the furthest spheres of Matter -- forming a sort of
crimson ganglion, or nervous network, running across every substance.

The whole Universe was vibrating. And yet, when I tried to look at the
details one by one, I found them still as sharply drawn, their individual
character still intact.

All this movement seemed to emanate from Christ -- from his Heart in
particular. And it was while I was trying to find my way back to the source
of this effluence and determine its rhythm that my attention returned to
the portrait itself, and then I saw the vision rapidly mount to its climax.

  ...

I see that I have forgotten to tell you how Christ was dressed. His
“raiment was white as the light," as we read in the account of the
Transfiguration. But what struck me most was that it was not woven on
any loom -- unless the hand of the Angels is the hand of‘Matter. It was
from no crudely spun thread that warp and weft were made; but Matter, a
florescence of Matter, had spontaneously woven itself, working with the
most intimate essence of its substance, to produce a magically textured
lawn. And I thought I could see the interlocked fibres running on and on,
harmoniously combining to form a natural design which was built into them
from their first beginning.

And yet, you must understand, I could not give my full attention to this
garment, so marvellously woven by the endless co-operation of all the
energies of Matter and its whole order. It was the transfigured Face
of the Master that drew me and held me.

At night time, you have often seen some stars that change the quality of
their light： at one moment they are blood-red beads, and then they take
on the shimmer of purple velvet. Similarly, you have seen the colours of
the rainbow float in a transparent bubble.

It was thus that the light and the colours of all the beauties we know
shone, with an inexpressible iridescence, over the face of Jesus, itself
unmoved. I cannot say whether it was an expression of my own wishes or
whether it was the choice of Him who determined and knew my tastes; but one
thing I know, that these countless modifications, instinct with majesty,
sweetness, and irresistible appeal, followed one another in succession,
were transformed, melted into one another in a harmony that was utterly
satisfying to me.

And all this time, beneath this surface movement--- both supporting it and
concentrating it in a higher unity -- floated the incommunicable Beauty
of Christ. ... Again, I guessed at rather than apprehended that Beauty;
for every time I tried to see through the screen oflesser beauties that
hid it from me, other particular and fragmentary beauties came to the
surface and drew a veil between me and True Beauty, even as they allowed
me to glimpse it and stimulated my longing.

The whole Face gave out this radiance regulated by this same law. But
the centre of radiation and iridescence was hidden in the eyes of the
transfigured portrait.

The Reflection -- or was it the Creative Form, the Idea? -- of all that
can charm, of all that has life, overlaid, in a rainbow, the rich depths of
those eyes. ... And as I tried to read the secret of the luminous simplicity
of their fire, it dissolved into a fathomless complexity in which were
united all that the expressive eye has ever held to bring warmth to the
heart of man and enthral it. For example, those eyes, which at first were
so sweet and tender that I thought it was my mother that I saw, became in
the next moment as full of passion and as dominating as those of a sovereign
lady -- so imperiously pure, at the same time, that it would have been
physically impossible for sensibility to be misguided. And then again
they were filled with a great and virile majesty, akin to that which can
be seen in the eyes of a man who has great courage or great strength --
and yet incomparably more lofty and more delightful in its mastery.

This scintillation of beauties was so total, so all-embracing, and at the
same time so swift, that it reached down into the very powerhouse of my
being, flooding through it in one surge, so that my whole self vibrated
to the very core of me, with a full note of explosive bliss that was
completely and utterly unique.

Now, while I eagerly concentrated my attention on the very pupils of
Christ’s eyes, in which I saw an infinite depth of Life, enchanting
and glowing, from those same depths I saw a sort of cloud forming, which
overlaid and drowned the shifting play of expression that l have been
trying to describe. Gradually a look of extraordinary intensity spread
over the fluctuating shades of emphasis I could read in the divine glance,
first seeping into them and then absorbing them into itself.

I was completely at a loss.

Ifound it impossible to decipher this final expression, which dominated and
summed up all that had gone before. I could not say whether it evidenced
an unspeakable agony or, on the contrary, an excess of triumphant joy. All
I know is that, since that occasion, I believe I have seen a hint of it
once, and that was in the eyes of a dying soldier.

My own eyes were instantly dimmed by tears. But when I was able to
look again at the picture of Christ in the church, it had resumed its
overdefined outline and the blank immobility of its features.
