---
Source:
  URL: https://tricycle.org/trikedaily/satipatthana-sutta-mindfulness/
  Translator: Thanissaro Bhikkhu
  Locus:
    Date: 5 March 2018
    Section: IV
  Source:
    Title: Satipatthana Sutta
    ID: 34a30556-7dcf-465e-a9a7-7b3ac1f0f124
Title: Mind
By: Gautama Buddha
---
“And how does a monk remain focused on the mind in and of itself? There
is the case where a monk, when the mind has passion, discerns, ‘The mind
has passion.’ When the mind is without passion, he discerns, ‘The mind
is without passion.’ When the mind has aversion, he discerns, ‘The
mind has aversion.’ When the mind is without aversion, he discerns,
‘The mind is without aversion.’ When the mind has delusion, he discerns,
‘The mind has delusion.’ When the mind is without delusion, he discerns,
‘The mind is without delusion.’

“When the mind is constricted, he discerns, ‘The mind is constricted
[sluggish].’ When the mind is scattered, he discerns, ‘The mind is
scattered.’ When the mind is enlarged, he discerns, ‘The mind is
enlarged. When the mind is not enlarged, he discerns that the mind is
not enlarged. When the mind is surpassed, he discerns, ‘The mind is
surpassed.’ When the mind is unsurpassed, he discerns, ‘The mind
is unsurpassed.’ When the mind is concentrated, he discerns, ‘The
mind is concentrated.’ When the mind is not concentrated, he discerns,
‘The mind is not concentrated.’ When the mind is released, he discerns,
‘The mind is released.’ When the mind is not released, he discerns,
‘The mind is not released.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on the mind in and of
itself, or externally on the mind in and of itself, or both internally
and externally on the mind in and of itself. Or he remains focused on the
phenomenon of origination with regard to the mind, on the phenomenon of
passing away with regard to the mind, or on the phenomenon of origination
and passing away with regard to the mind. Or his mindfulness that ‘There
is a mind’ is maintained to the extent of knowledge and remembrance. And
he remains independent, unsustained by [not clinging to] anything in the
world. This is how a monk remains focused on the mind in and of itself.
