---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LIII
    Page: 91-92
Title: Of divers unseemly practices that follow them that lack the work
  of this book
---
Many wonderful practices follow them that be deceived in this false work,
or in any species thereof, beyond that doth them that be God’s true
disciples： for they be evermore full seemly in all their practices, bodily
or ghostly. But it is not so of these other. For whoso would or might behold
unto them where they sit in this time, an it so were that their eyelids were
open, he should see them stare as they were mad, and leeringly look as if they
saw the devil. Surely it is good they be wary, for truly the fiend is not
far. Some set their eyes in their heads as they were sturdy sheep beaten in
the head, and as they should die anon. Some hang their heads on one side as
if a worm were in their ears. Some pipe when they should speak, as if there
were no spirit in their bodies： and this is the proper condition of an
hypocrite. Some cry and whine in their throats, so be they greedy and hasty
to say that they think： and this is the condition of heretics, and of them
that with presumption and with curiosity of wit will always maintain error.

Many unordained and unseemly practices follow on this error, whoso might
perceive all. Nevertheless some there be that be so curious that they can
refrain them in great part when they come before men. But might these men be
seen in place where they be homely, then I trow they should not be hid. And
nevertheless yet I trow that whoso would straitly gainsay their opinion,
that they should soon see them burst out in some point; and yet them think
that all that ever they do, it is for the love of God and for to maintain
the truth. Now truly I hope that unless God shew His merciful miracle to
make them soon leave off, they shall love God so long on this manner, that
they shall go staring mad to the devil. I say not that the devil hath so
perfect a servant in this life, that is deceived and infect with all these
fantasies that I set here： and nevertheless yet it may be that one, yea,
and many one, be infect with them all. But I say that he hath no perfect
hypocrite nor heretic in earth that he is not guilty in some that I have said,
or peradventure shall say if God vouchsafeth.

For some men are so cumbered in nice curious customs in bodily bearing, that
when they shall ought hear, they writhe their heads on one side quaintly,
and up with the chin： they gape with their mouths as they should hear
with their mouth and not with their ears. Some when they should speak point
with their fingers, either on their fingers, or on their own breasts, or
on theirs that they speak to. Some can neither sit still, stand still, nor
lie still, unless they be either wagging with their feet or else somewhat
doing with their hands. Some row with their arms in time of their speaking,
as them needed for to swim over a great water. Some be evermore smiling and
laughing at every other word that they speak, as they were giggling girls
and nice japing jugglers lacking behaviour. Seemly cheer were full fair,
with sober and demure bearing of body and mirth in manner.

I say not that all these unseemly practices be great sins in themselves, nor
yet all those that do them be great sinners themselves. But I say if that these
unseemly and unordained practices be governors of that man that doth them,
insomuch that he may not leave them when he will, then I say that they be
tokens of pride and curiosity of wit, and of unordained shewing and covetyse
of knowing. And specially they be very tokens of unstableness of heart and
unrestfulness of mind, and specially of the lacking of the work of this book.
And this is the only reason why that I set so many of these deceits here in
this writing; for why, that a ghostly worker shall prove his work by them.
