---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XIX
    Page: 50
Title: A short excusation of him that made this book teaching how all
  contemplatives should have all actives fully excused of their complaining
  words and deeds
---
Some might think that I do little worship to Martha, that special saint, for
I liken her words of complaining of her sister unto these worldly men’s
words, or theirs unto hers： and truly I mean no unworship to her nor to
them. And God forbid that I should in this work say anything that might
be taken in condemnation of any of the servants of God in any degree, and
namely of His special saint. For me thinketh that she should be full well
had excused of her plaint, taking regard to the time and the manner that she
said it in. For that that she said, her unknowing was the cause. And no wonder
though she knew not at that time how Mary was occupied; for I trow that before
she had little heard of such perfection. And also that she said, it was but
courteously and in few words： and therefore she should always be had excused.

And so me thinketh that these worldly living men and women of active life
should also full well be had excused of their complaining words touched
before, although they say rudely that they say; having beholding to their
ignorance. For why? Right as Martha wist full little what Mary her sister
did when she complained of her to our Lord; right so on the same manner these
folk nowadays wot full little, or else nought, what these young disciples of
God mean, when they set them from the business of this world, and draw them
to be God’s special servants in holiness and rightfulness of spirit. And
if they wist truly, I daresay that they would neither do nor say as they
say. And therefore me thinketh always that they should be had excused：
for why, they know no better living than is that they live in themselves.
And also when I think on mine innumerable defaults, the which I have made
myself before this time in words and deeds for default of knowing, me thinketh
then if I would be had excused of God for mine ignorant defaults, that I
should charitably and piteously have other men’s ignorant words and deeds
always excused. And surely else, do I not to others as I would they did to me.
