---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "12 - ䷋ - P'i"
    Line: 2
    Page: 87-88
By: William H. Whyte, Jr.
---
This ... is about the organization man. If the term is vague, it is because
I can think of no other way to describe the people I am talking about. They
are not the workers, nor are they the white-collar people in the usual,
clerk sense of the word. These people only work for The Organization. The
ones I am talking about belong to it as well. They are the ones of our
middle class who have left home, spiritually as well physically, to take
the vows of organization life, and it is they who are the mind and soul of
our great self-perpetuating institutions. Only a few are top managers or
ever will be. In a system that makes such hazy terminology as “junior
executive” psychologically necessary, they are of the staff as much as
the line, and most are destined to live poised in a middle area that still
awaits a satisfactory euphemism. But they are the dominant members of our
society nonetheless. They have not joined together into a recognizable
elite -- our country does not stand still long enough for that -- but it
is from their ranks that are coming most of the first and second echelons
of our leadership, and it is their values which will set the American temper.

The corporation man is the most conspicuous example, but he is only one,
for the collectivization so visible in the corporation has affected almost
every field of work. Blood brother to the business trainee off to join Du
Pont is the seminary student who will end up in the church hierarchy, the
doctor headed for the corporate clinic, the physics PhD, in a govemment
laboratory, the intellectual on the foundationsponsored team project,
the engineering graduate in the huge drafting room at Lockheed, the young
apprentice in a Wall Street law factory.

They are all, as they so often put it, in the same boat. Listen to them
talk to each other over the front lawns of their suburbia and you cannot
help but be struck by how well they grasp the common denominators which
bind them. Whatever the differences in their organization ties, it is
the common problems of collective work that dominate their attentions,
and when the Du Pont man talks to the research chemist or the chemist to
the army man, it is these problems that are uppermost. The word collective
most of them can’t bring themselves to use ... but they are keenly aware
of how much more deeply beholden they are to organization than were their
elders. They are wry about it, to be sure; they talk of the “treadmill,”
the “rat race,” of the inability to control one’s direction.

But they have no great sense of plight; between themselves and organization
they believe they see an ultimate harmony and, more than most elders
recognize, they are building an ideology that will vouchsafe this trust.
