---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 80-82
  Source:
    Title: The Seven Storey Mountain
By: Thomas Merton
---
I was in my room. It was night. The light was on. Suddenly it seemed to
me that Father, who had now been dead more than a year, was there with me.
The sense ofhis presence was as vivid and as real and as startling as ifhe
had touched my arm or spoken to me. The whole thing passed in a flash,
but in that flash, instantly, I was overwhelmed with a sudden and profound
insight into the misery and corruption of my own soul, and I was pierced
deeply with a light that made me realize something of the condition I was in,
and I was filled with horror at what I saw, and my whole being rose up in
revolt against what was within me, and my soul desired escape and liberation
and freedom from all this with an intensity and an urgency unlike anything I
had ever known before. And now I think for the first time in my whole life I
really began to pray-praying not with my lips and with my intellect and my
imagination, but praying out of the very roots of my life and of my being,
and praying to the God I had never known, to reach down towards me out of
His darkness and to help me to get free ofthe thousand terrible things that
held my will in their slavery.

There were a lot of tears connected with this, and they did me good, and
all the while, although I had lost that first vivid, agonizing sense of the
presence of my father in the room, I had him in my mind, and I was talking
to him as well as to God, as though he were a sort of intermediary. I do not
mean this in any way that might be interpreted that I thought he was among
the saints. I did not really know what that might mean then, and now that I
do know I would hesitate to say that I thought he was in Heaven. Judging by
my memory ofthe experience I should say it was “as if" he had been sent
to me out of Purgatory. For after all, there is no reason why the souls in
Purgatory should not help those on earth by their prayers and influence,
just like those in Heaven： although usually they need our help more than
we need theirs. But in this case, assuming my guess has some truth in it,
things were the other way ’round.

However, this is not a thing on which I would place any great stress. And I
do not offer any definite explanation ofit. How do I know it was not merely
my own imagination, or something that could be traced to a purely natural,
psychological cause-I mean the part about my father? It is impossible to
say. I do not offer any explanation. And I have always had a great antipathy
for everything that smells of necromancy-table-turning and communications with
the dead, and I would never deliberately try to enter in to any such thing. But
whether it was imagination or nerves or whatever else it may have been, I
can say truly that I did feel, most vividly, as if my father were present
there, and the consequences that I have described fol -- lowed from this,
as though he had communicated to me without words an interior light from God,
about the condition of my own soul-although I wasn't even sure I had a soul.

The one thing that seems to me morally certain is that this was really a grace,
and a great grace. Ifl had only followed it through, my life might have been
very different and much less miserable for the years that were to come.

Before now I had never prayed in the churches I had visited. But I remember the
morning that followed this experience. I remember how I climbed the deserted
Aventine, in the spring sun, with my soul broken up with contrition, but broken
and clean, painful but sanitary like a lanced abscess, like a bone broken and
re-set. And it was true contrition, too, for I don’t think I was capable of
mere attrition, since I did not believe in hell. I went to the Dominicans’
Church, Santa Sabina. And it was a very definite experience, something that
amounted to a capitulation, a surrender, a conversion, not without struggle,
even now, to walk deliberately into the church with no other purpose than
to kneel down and pray to God. Ordinarily, I never knelt in these churches,
and never paid any formal or official attention to Whose house it was. But
now I took holy water at the door and went straight up to the altar rail and
knelt down and said, slowly, with all the belief I had in me, the Our Father.

It seems almost unbelievable to me that I did no more than this, for the
memory remains in me as that of such an experience that it would seem to have
implied at least a half hour of impassioned prayer and tears. The thing to
remember is that I had not prayed at all for some years.

Another thing which Catholics do not realize about converts is the tremendous,
agonizing embarrassment and self-consciousness which they feel about praying
publicly in a Catholic church. The effort it takes to overcome all the strange
imaginary fears that everyone is looking at you, and that they all think you
are crazy or ridiculous, is something that costs a tremendous effort. And
that day in Santa Sabina, although the church was almost entirely empty,
I walked across the stone floor mortally afraid that a poor devout old
Italian woman was following me with suspicious eyes. As I knelt to pray,
I wondered ifshe would run out and accuse me at once to the priests, with
scandalous horror, for coming and praying in their church-as if Catholics
were perfectly content to have a lot of heretic tourists walking about their
churches with complete indifference and irreverence, and would get angry
if one of them so far acknowledged God’s presence there as to go on his
knees for a few seconds and say a prayer!

However, I prayed, then I looked about the church, and went into a room where
there was a picture by Sassoferrato, and stuck my face out a door into a tiny,
simple cloister‘ where the sun shone down on an orange tree. After that
I walked out into the open feeling as ifl had been reborn, and crossed the
street, and strolled through the suburban fields to another deserted church
where I did not pray, being scared by some carpenters and scaffolding. I sat
outside, in the sun, on a wall and tasted the joy of my own inner peace,
and turned over in my mind how my life was now going to change, and how I
would become better.
