---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 216-218
  Source:
    Title: Honor and Ceremony in Women's Rituals
By: E. M. Broner
Format: mixed
---
It is my feeling that all humans mark their paths on trees, mark time with
ceremony. That repetition and orderliness make for ritual. Etymologically,
rite is from ritual, as is arithmetic. We want sums, constants. Rhythm
is from the same root. Ritual is a collective experience, repeated and
sanctified. We perform it to remind ourselves and one another that we are
not alone, that we sing in chorus. We are historical, and what has happened
to us is not an isolated instance. Birth has occurred before, and we women
birth in a cave of women’s experiences, when we are fortunate. Death
has happened before, and we lament with others who have suffered losses.

Honoring Forms of Birthing

As exodus is universal, so is birthing, so is pairing, so is death. Women
have always been present at birth, and women were there at the final
exodus as the body dressers, keeners -- gods of entrance and exit. Ceremony
returns to ourselves as our bodies return to ourselves.

I have gone with Harriette Hartigan, a Detroit photographer, to watch
a home delivery. There were no white-masked strangers, only friendly
women, a child or two, and a father-to-be, who was massaging the laboring
woman. Barbara was deep into her labor, and her lover rubbed her back
low and to the sides when the contractions were full upon her. Barbara
called to the life within： “Come down, baby." Her three-year-old,
Lenay, asked. “What’s Mommy doing?" Barbara said, “Mommy is working,
Lenay.” Lenay asked, "Why is Mommy making those sounds?" Barbara said,
“Mommy is calling in a secret voice to the baby. Those are working and
calling sounds." The child watched as the eye of the vagina opened wide in
surprise, crowned with a head, with eyebrows, stuck on the nose. Barbara
labored mightily and crooned and lullaby'd the life into birth. The midwife
caught the baby. Barbara’s body sweated like that of any road laborer;
her hair was tangled and damp. She rose from the birthing bed, showered,
and brushed her hair. I had brought champagne. We popped the cork, drank,
and talked quietly about matters of birthing. We played the tape that we
had made of Barbara calling to the baby, of Barbara calling out to her
mother and to her lover. We were there to begin a new kind of ceremony.

I also participated in an old birthing ceremony. In Ianuary 1978, during
a great snowstorm, I flew from Detroit to New York. It was Friday, the
thirteenth, the day of the circumcision of Phyllis Chesler’s son. Chesler
knew the rabbi would speak of the son as if he were only of father born,
grandfather connected, male ancestry descended, but would forget that the
womb had held him. It was as we had anticipated. After the male ceremony,
we women retrieved the baby and took him into the library. There we
surrendered him with the magic circle of ourselves. I requested that we
each bless him in our own voice, that we give him something useful and
magical, a growing part of ourselves. I took out scissors and cut a lock
of my hair. I taped it onto a sheet of red oaktag. Each woman present cut
her hair -- grey, black, blonde, brown hair. We lit candles and wished
the baby courage to be the son of a feminist, courage to be lonely, to
have laughter and friendship with his mother. We blew out the candles
and presented the baby with this hairy card of great power. The storm
had not abated, but I rose and flew through it back to Detroit.

  I bless you, I the priestess of you
  I, your mouth, your cry, your prayer, your pain,
  your connection, your separation ...
  I am your scribe. I inscribe your pain.
  I am your collective soul ...
  I am born through the tunnel of your collective bodies,
  yet I am old-your ancient, your memory, your ancestor.
  My tears fill cauldrons, brews, broths, seas, eyes,
  I am the mourner for you,
  I am your wake ...
  I blow trumpets for you, I celebrate you,
  I laugh aloud for you ...
  Trust me for I am the ghost of you.
  Look, in the shadows I walk behind you ...
  Spread your legs, my daughters,
  let us give birth to one another.
  Let us cry out in birthing pain.
  Let us uncover our shame.
  Let this ceremony, let these friendships be born.
