---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LXVII
    Page: 109-110
Title: That whoso knoweth not the powers of a soul and the manner of her
  working, may lightly be deceived in understanding of ghostly words and
  of ghostly working; and how a soul is made a God in grace
---
Lo, ghostly friend! to such wretchedness as thou here mayest see be we
fallen for sin： and therefore what wonder is it, though we be blindly and
lightly deceived in understanding of ghostly words and of ghostly working,
and specially those the which know not yet the powers of their souls and
the manners of their working?

For ever when the Memory is occupied with any bodily thing be it taken to never
so good an end, yet thou art beneath thyself in this working, and without
any soul. And ever when thou feelest thy Memory occupied with the subtle
conditions of the powers of thy soul and their workings in ghostly things,
as be vices or virtues, of thyself, or of any creature that is ghostly and
even with thee in nature, to that end that thou mightest by this work learn
to know thyself in furthering of perfection： then thou art within thyself,
and even with thyself. But ever when thou feelest thy Memory occupied with no
manner of thing that is bodily or ghostly, but only with the self substance
of God, as it is and may be, in the proof of the work of this book： then
thou art above thyself and beneath thy God.

Above thyself thou art： for why, thou attainest to come thither by grace,
whither thou mayest not come by nature. That is to say, to be oned to God,
in spirit, and in love, and in accordance of will. Beneath thy God thou
art： for why, although it may be said in manner, that in this time God
and thou be not two but one in spirit -- insomuch that thou or another,
for such onehead that feeleth the perfection of this work, may soothfastly
by witness of Scripture be called a God -- nevertheless yet thou art beneath
Him. For why, He is God by nature without beginning; and thou, that sometime
wert nought in substance, and thereto after when thou wert by His might and
His love made ought, wilfully with sin madest thyself worse than nought,
only by His mercy without thy desert are made a God in grace, oned with Him
in spirit without departing, both here and in bliss of heaven without any
end. So that, although thou be all one with Him in grace, yet thou art full
far beneath Him in nature.

Lo, ghostly friend! hereby mayest thou see somewhat in part, that whoso
knoweth not the powers of their own soul, and the manner of their working,
may full lightly be deceived in understanding of words that be written to
ghostly intent. And therefore mayest thou see somewhat the cause why that
I durst not plainly bid thee shew thy desire unto God, but I bade thee
childishly do that in thee is to hide it and cover it. And this I do for
fear lest thou shouldest conceive bodily that that is meant ghostly.
