---
Tags:
  - The Quest=The Fire Beyond the Tomb - Contemplating God, Faith, and Truth
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 9-11
  Source:
    Title: On God
By: J. Krishnamurti
---
QUESTIONER： There are many concepts of God in the world today. What is
your thought concerning God?

KRISHNAMURTI： First of all, we must find out what we mean by a concept.
What do we mean by the process of thinking? Because, after all, when we
formulate a concept, let us say of God, our formula or concept must be the
result ofour conditioning, must it not." lfwe believe in God, surely our
belief is the result ofour environment. There are those who are trained from
childhood to deny God and those who are trained to believe in God, as most
of you have been. So we formulate a concept ofGod according to our training,
according to our background, according to our idiosyncrasies, likes and
dislikes, hopes and fears. Obviously then, as long as we do not understand
the process of our own thinking, mere concepts of‘God have no value at all,
have they." Because thought can project anything it likes. It can create and
deny God. Each person can invent or destroy God according to his inclinations,
pleasures, and pains. Therefore, as long as thought is active, formulating,
inventing, that which is beyond time can never be discovered. God, or reality,
is to be discovered only when thought comes to an end.

Now, when you ask, “What is your thought concerning God?" you have
already formulated your own thought, have you not? Thought can create
God and experience that which it has created. But surely that is not true
experience. It is only its own projection that thought experiences, and
therefore it is not real. But if you and I can see the truth of this, then
perhaps we shall experience something much greater than a mere projection
of thought.

At the present time, when there is greater and greater insecurity outwardly,
there is obviously a yearning for inward security. Since we cannot find
security outside, we seek it in an idea, in thought, and so we create
that which we call God, and that concept becomes our security. Now a mind
that seeks security surely cannot find the real, the true. To understand
that which is beyond time, the fabrications of thought must come to an
end. Thought cannot exist without words, symbols, images. And only when
the mind is quiet, free of its own creations, is there a possibility of
finding out what is real. So merely to ask ifthere is or is not God is an
immature response to the problem, is it not? To formulate opinions about God
is really childish. To experience, to realize that which is beyond time, we
must obviously understand the process of time. The mind is the result of time,
it is based on the memories of yesterday. And is it possible to be free from
the multiplication of yesterdays that is the process of time? Surely this is a
very serious problem; it is not a matter of beliefor disbelief? Believing and
disbelieving is a process of ignorance, whereas understanding the time-binding
quality of thought brings freedom in which alone there can be discovery. But
most of us want to believe because it is much more convenient; it gives us
a sense of security, a sense of belonging to the group. Surely this very
belief separates us," you believe in one thing and I believe in another. So
belief acts as a barrier; it is a process ofdisintegration.

What is important, then, is not the cultivation of belief or disbelief,
but to understand the process of the mind. It is the mind, it is thought
that creates time. Thought is time, and whatever thought projects must be of
time; therefore, thought cannot possibly go beyond itself. To discover what
is beyond time, thought must come to an end, and that is a most difficult
thing because the ending of thought does not come about through discipline,
through control, through denial or suppression. Thought ends only when we
understand the whole process of thinking, and to understand thinking there must
be self-knowledge. Thought is the self, thought is the word that identifies
itself as the “me” and, at whatever level the selfis placed, high or low,
it is still within the field of thought.

To find God, that which is beyond time, we must understand the process
of thought-that is, the process ofoneself. The self is very complex; it
is not at any one level, but is made up of many thoughts, many entities,
each in contradiction with the others. There must be a constant awareness
of them all, an awareness in which there is no choice, no condemnation or
comparison; that is, there must be the capacity to see things as they are
without distorting or translating them. The moment we judge or translate
what is seen, we distort it according to our background. To discover reality
or God, there can be no belief because acceptance or denial is a barrier
to discovery. We all want to be secure both outwardly and inwardly, and the
mind must understand that the search for security is an illusion. It is only
the mind that is insecure, completely free from any form of possession that
can discover-and this is an arduous task. It does not mean retiring into
the woods, or to a monastery, or isolating oneself in some peculiar belief;
on the contrary, nothing can exist in isolation. To be is to be related;
it is only in the midst of relationship that we can spontaneously discover
ourselves as we are. It is this very discovery ofourselves as we are, without
any sense of condemnation or justification, that brings about a fundamental
transformation in what we are. And that is the beginning of wisdom.
