---
Glossary:
  - Definition: Bodhisattva of Inexhausible Intelligence
    Name: Mujinni Bosatsu
  - Definition: Avalokiteshvara
    Name: Kwanzeon Bosatsu
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 1019-1021
  Source:
    Locus: XXV
    Title:
      - Saddharma-pundarika
      - Kwannon Sutra
Tags:
  - Invocation=The Universal Elixir
  - Life-Love=Faith=Salvation Through Faith
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=Materia Prima and Human Perfection
  - Beauty-Peace=The Surface Of The Waters=Dominating the Waters
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=Crossing the Flood
  - Combat-Action=Holy War=The Weapon of Invocation
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Powers of Darkness
  - Invocation=The Dispeller of Sin
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=Resolution
    of Contraries
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Hold of Passion
  - Life-Love=Faith=Trust in God
  - Combat-Action=Work, Action and Society=Act and Essence
---
At that time Mujinni Bosatsu rose from his seat, and, baring his right
shoulder, turned, with his hands folded, towards the Buddha, and said this：
World-honoured One, for what reason is Kwanzeon Bosatsu so named?

The Buddha said to Mujinni Bosatsu： Good man, when those innumerable numbers
of beings -- hundred-thousands of myriads of kotis of them -- who are suffering
all kinds of annoyances, hearing of this Kwanzeon Bosatsu, will utter his name
with singleness of mind, they will instantly hear his voice and be released.

Even when people fall into a great fire, if they hold the name of Kwanzeon
Bosatsu, the fire will not scorch them because of the spiritual power of
this Bosatsu. When they are tossed up and down in the surging waves, if they
pronounce his name they will get into a shallower place.

When hundred-thousands of myriads of kotis of people go out into the great
ocean in order to seek such treasures as gold, silver, lapis lazuli, conch
shells, cornelian, coral, amber, pearls, and other precious stones, their
boats may be wrecked by black storms, and they may find themselves thrown
up into the island of the Rakshasas; if among them there is even a single
person who will utter the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu all the people will be
released from the disaster (which is likely to befall them at the hand)
of the Rakshasas. For this reason the Bosatsu is called Kwanzeon.

When, again, a man is about to suffer an injury, if he will utter the name
of Kwanzeon Bosatsu, the sword or the stick that is held (by the executioner)
will be at once broken to pieces and the man be released.

When all the Yakshas and Rakshasas filling the three thousand chiliocosms
come and annoy a man, they may hear him utter the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu,
and no wicked spirits will dare look at him with their evil eyes, much less
inflict injuries on him.

When again a man, whether guilty or innocent, finds himself bound in chains
or held with manacles, he uttering the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu will see
all these broken to pieces and be released.

When all the lands in the three thousand chiliocosms are filled with enemies,
a merchant and his caravan loaded with precious treasures may travel through
the dangerous passes. One of the company will say to the others： 'O
good men, have no fear; only with singleness of thought utter the name of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu. As this Bosatsu gives us fearlessness, utter his name
and you will be delivered from your enemies.' Hearing this, all the company
join in the recitation, saying, 'Kwanzeon Bosatsu be adored!' Because
of this uttering the name of the Bosatsu they will be released. O Mujinni,
such is the awe-inspiring spiritual power of Kwanzeon Bosatsu Makasatsu.

When people are possessed of excessive lust, let them always reverentially
think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu and they will be freed from it. If they are possessed
of excessive anger, let them always reverentially think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu,
and they will be freed from it. When they are possessed of excessive folly
let them always reverentially think of Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and they will be
freed from it. O Mujinni, of such magnitude is his spiritual power which is
full of blessings. Therefore, let all beings always think of him.

If a woman desire a male child, let her worship and make offerings to
Kwanzeon Bosatsu, and she will have a male child fully endowed with bliss
and wisdom. If she desire a female child, she will have one graceful in
features and in possession of all the characteristics (of noble womanhood),
and because of her having planted the root of merit the child will be loved
and respected by all beings. O Mujinni, such is the power of Kwanzeon Bosatsu.

If all beings worship and make offerings to Kwanzeon Bosatsu, they will
derive benefits unfailingly from this. Therefore, let all beings hold the
name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu. O Mujinni, if there is a man who holds the names
of all the Bodhisattvas equal in number to sixty-two billion times as many
as the sands of the Ganga, and till the end of his life makes them offerings
of food and drink, clothing and bedding and medicine, what do you think?
Is not the merit accumulated by such a man very great?

Mujinni said： Very great, indeed. World-honoured One!

The Buddha said： Here is another man; if he should hold the name of
Kwanzeon Bosatsu even for a while and make offerings to the Bosatsu, the
merit so attained by this one is fully equal to that (of the previous one),
and will not be exhausted eyen to the end of hundred-thousands of myriads
of kotis of kalpas. Those who hold the name of Kwanzeon Bosatsu gain such
immeasurable and innumerable masses of blissful merit.
