---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 90-91
  Source:
    Title: Chronicles of Wasted Time
By: Malcolm Muggeridge
---
He drove to the furthest point along the coast road, some six miles from
Lourenco Marques, and there got out of the car and undressed. The lights were
still on in Peter‘s Cafe and Costa da Sol. As the tide was far out, he had
to wade on and on before there was enough water to swim in. So this was the end
of his life, his last little while on earth. He kept on trying to think of the
French word for "drown." Everything seemed to him unreal -- had there been a
single moment in his life when he had truly lived? Everything false -- love,
hate, despair, all equally false. Even his dying seemed false. Was it him,
wading on to the open sea." Was it really happening? The bottom he trod on
was muddy now, the water creeping up and cold, the air damp. At last there
was enough water to swim in. He started swimming, the dark water churning
white as his arms beat through it. Soon he was out of his depth, and still
swam on. Now he felt easy, now it was settled. Looking back he could scarcely
see the shore; only the lights of Peter's Cafe" and Costa da Sol, far, far,
away. He began to tremble, all his body trembled; he went under the water,
trembling, came up again and reposed himself as though on a bed. He could sleep
on this watery mattress, sleep. Then, suddenly, without thinking or deciding,
he started swimming back to shore. He was very tired, and kept feeling as
if he was in his depth again, and wasn't; he shouted foolishly for help,
and kept his eyes fixed on the lights of Peter’s Cafe’ and Costa da Sol.

They were lights of the world; they were the lights of his home, his habitat,
where he belonged. He must reach them. There followed an overwhelming joy
such as he had never experienced before; an ecstasy. In some mysterious
way it became clear to him that there was no darkness, only the possibility
oflosing szg’ht ofa light which shone eternally; that our clumsy appetites
are no more than the blind reaching of a newly born child after the teat
through which to suck the milk oflife; that our sufferings, our affliction,
are part of a drama -- an essential, even an ecstatic, part -- endlessly
revolving round the two great propositions of good and evil, oflight and
darkness. A briefinterlude, an incarnation, reaching back into the beginning
oftime, and forward into an ultimate fulfilment in the universal spirit of
love which informs, animates, illuminates all creation, from the tiniest
particle of insentient matter to the radiance of God's very throne.

Now he felt the bottom, and began to wade laboriously back to the shore,
reaching it by the estuary ofa river, a long way away from where he had first
gone into the sea. All round him was deep black mud, through which, shaking
with cold, he fioundered until, by luck more than any sense of direction, he
saw his car where he had left it. Even at the time he realized, and realizes
now ever more clearly, that this floundering was a sort of parable. Plodding
and floundering on through deep mud, but never again without hope; thenceforth
always knowing, deep in his heart, remembering even when he forgot, that it
was not by chance or for nothing that the lights of Peter’s Cafe" and Costa
da Sol had called him back. That he, too, had something he must try to say
and be, until the time came for God to put him to sleep, as he had tried, in
his own fatuous and sinful wilfulness, to put himself to sleep in the sea off
Lourenco Marques. When, finally, he reached his car and clothes, the morning
was just breaking; the black African sky just beginning to be tinged with
grey. I-Ie breathed in the dawn air, greedily; after all, he was still alive.

Though he scarcely realized it at the time, and subsequently only very
slowly and dimly, this episode represented for him one of those deep changes
which take place in our lives. ... A kind of spiritual adolescence, whereby,
thenceforth, all his values and pursuits and hopes were going to undergo a
total transformation-from the carnal towards the spiritual; from the immediate,
the now, towards the everlasting, the eternal. In a tiny dark dungeon of
the ego, chained and manacled, he had glimpsed a glimmer of light coming
in through the barred window high above him. It was the light of Peter’s
Cafe’ and Costa da Sol calling him back to earth, his mortal home; it was
the grey light of morning heralding another day as he floundered and struggled
through the black mud; it was the light of the world. The bars of the window,
as he looked more closely, took on the form of a Cross.
