---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 460
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Powers of Darkness
By: The Duke of Brunswick
References:
  - Body: |
      Situated in the initiatic current, link in a traditional chain which
      has included organizations of the most diverse character (as regards
      their modes of expression or their titles)： GNOSTICS, ALCHEMISTS.
      CATHARI, ALBIGENSES. ROSE-CROSS, the HERMETIC. PYTHAGOREAN and
      PLATONIC schools, successors to the Egyptian Temple Initiations,
      contemporaries of the MARTINISTS. the EUDIASTS, the ANTHROPOSOPHISTS.
      and the ROSICRUCIAN societies, applying the same speculative methods.
      SUFISM is one of the INITIATIC ORDERS in which is perpetuated the
      TRADITION OF SYMBOLIC TEACHING in the form of MODAKARAS. ...

      Christ, this Great Initiate, replied (St Mark, IV. 10, 11) to those in
      his group who questioned him：

      "Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God： but
      unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables.”

      This is why the constant practice of Symbolism must be the basis and
      foundation of our initiatic work, in constructing the Temple of our
      Ideal, Will. Perseverance and Work being the materials best suited to
      assure the Beauty. Solidarity and Harmony of the Edifice.

      Tradition requires us to remain faithful to a knowledge which
      constitutes a link and a universal language between Thinkers of all
      races and all latitudes, and likewise a possibility for mutual
      comprehension, collaboration, understanding, and assistance among all
      those who aspire to the same ideal of fraternity and love’
    Source: A Disciple： ‘Lettre à un Fakir'： Les Amis de l'Islam, Mostaganem.
      nos. March and May. 1954
  - Body: |
      We must consider how we can begin to work under another form. If only
      the aim is achieved, it does not matter under what cover it takes
      place, and a cover is always necessary. For in concealment lies a
      great part of our strength. For this reason we must always cover
      ourselves with the name of another society. The lodges that are under
      Freemasonry are in the meantime the most suitable cloak for our high
      purpose, because the world is already accustomed to expect nothing
      great from them which merits attention A society concealed in this
      manner cannot be worked against. In case of a prosecution or of
      treason the superiors cannot be discovered. ... We shall be shrouded
      in impenetrable darkness from spies and emissaries of other societies
    Source: Adam Weishaupt： Neueslen Arbeiten des Spartacus und Philo, Munich.
      1794. pp. 143. 163： in Webster, op. cit.. pp. 219-220
---
A great sect arose which, taking for its motto the good and the
happiness of man, worked in the darkness of the conspiracy to make the
happiness of humanity a prey for itself.
