---
Source:
  ID: 7593ef1f-e8a3-4f07-9af6-def46ad4ebc3
  Title: The Way of Chuang Tzu
  Editor: Thomas Merton
  Contributor: Thomas Merton
  By: Chuang Tzu
  Source:
    ID: e6a8d459-c618-4308-977f-da03609dfdf4
    Locus:
      Chapter: II
      Verse: 3
  Locus:
    Page: 42-43
Title: The Pivot
---
Tao is obscured when men understand only one of a pair of opposites, or
concentrate only on a partial aspect of being. Then clear expression also
becomes muddled by mere wordplay, affirming this one aspect and denying
all the rest.

Hence the wrangling of Confucians and Mohists; each denies what the other
affirms, and affirms what the other denies. What use is this struggle to
set up "No" against "Yes," and "Yes" against "No"? Better to abandon this
hopeless effort and seek true light!

There is nothing that cannot be seen from the standpoint of the "Not-I." And
there is nothing which cannot be seen from the standpoint of the "I." If
I begin by looking at anything from the viewpoint of the "Not-I," then I
do not really see it, since it is "not I" that sees it. If I begin from
where I am and see it as I see it, then it may also become possible for me
to see it as another sees it. Hence the theory of reversal that opposites
produce each other, depend on each other, and complement each other.

However this may be, life is followed by death; death is followed
by life. The possible becomes impossible; the impossible becomes
possible. Right turns into wrong and wrong into right -- the flow of
life alters circumstances and thus things themselves are altered in their
turn. But disputants continue to affirm and to deny the same things they
have always affirmed and denied, ignoring the new aspects of reality
presented by the change in conditions.

The wise man therefore, instead of trying to prove this or that point by
logical disputation, sees all things in the light of direct intuition. He
is not imprisoned by the limitations of the "I," for the viewpoint of
direct intuition is that of both "I" and "Not-I." Hence he sees that
on both sides of every argument there is both right and wrong. He also
sees that in the end they are reducible to the same thing, once they are
related to the pivot of Tao.

When the wise man grasps this pivot, he is in the center of the circle,
and there he stands while "Yes" and "No" pursue each other around the
circumference.

The pivot of Tao passes through the center where all affirmations
and denials converge. He who grasps the pivot is at the still-point
from which all movements and oppositions can be seen in their right
relationship. Hence he sees the limitless possibilities of both "Yes"
and "No." Abandoning all thought of imposing a limit or taking sides,
he rests in direct intuition. Therefore I said： "Better to abandon
disputation and seek the true light!"
