---
By: Michael Bruce Curry
Source:
  URL: "https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2018/05/20/612798691/\
    bishop-michael-currys-royal-wedding-sermon-full-text-of-the-power-of-love"
  Locus:
    Date: May 20, 2018
Description: Sermon delivered at the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan
  Markle on May 19, 2018
---
And now in the name of our loving, liberating and life-giving God, Father,
Son and Holy Spirit, Amen.

From the Song of Solomon in the Bible： Set me as a seal upon your heart,
as a seal upon your arm; for love is strong as death, passion fierce as
the grave, Its flashes are flashes of fire, a raging flame, Many waters
cannot quench love, neither can floods drown it.

The late Dr Martin Luther King Jr once said, and I quote： "We must
discover the power of love, the redemptive power of love, And when we do
that, we will make of this old world a new world, for love is the only way."

There's power in love, Don't underestimate it, Don't even
over-sentimentalize it, There's power, power in love.

If you don't believe me, think about a time when you first fell in love,
The whole world seemed to center around you and your beloved.

Oh there's power, power in love, Not just in its romantic forms, but
any form, any shape of love, There's a certain sense in which when you
are loved, and you know it, when someone cares for you, and you know it,
when you love and you show it -- it actually feels right.

There is something right about it, And there's a reason for it, The
reason has to do with the source, We were made by a power of love, and
our lives were meant -- and are meant -- to be lived in that love, That's
why we are here.

Ultimately, the source of love is God himself： the source of all of our
lives, There's an old medieval poem that says： 'Where true love is found,
God himself is there.

The New Testament says it this way： "Beloved, let us love one another,
because love is of God, and those who love are born of God and know God,
Those who do not love do not know God, Why? For God is love."

There's power in love, There's power in love to help and heal when nothing
else can.

There's power in love to lift up and liberate when nothing else will.

There's power in love to show us the way to live.

Set me as a seal on your heart ... a seal on your arm, for love is as
strong as death.

But love is not only about a young couple, Now the power of love is
demonstrated by the fact that we're all here, Two young people fell in
love, and we all showed up.

But it's not just for and about a young couple, who we rejoice with,
It's more than that.

Jesus of Nazareth on one occasion was asked by a lawyer to sum up the
essence of the teachings of Moses, and he went back and he reached back
into the Hebrew scriptures, to Deuteronomy and Leviticus, and Jesus said：
"You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, all your soul, all
your mind and all your strength, This is the first and great commandment,
And the second is like it： Love your neighbor as yourself."

And then in Matthew's version, he added, he said： "On these two,
love of God and love of neighbor, hang all the law, all the prophets,
everything that Moses wrote, everything in the holy prophets, everything
in the scriptures, everything that God has been trying to tell the world ...
love God, love your neighbors, and while you're at it, love yourself."

Someone once said that Jesus began the most revolutionary movement in
human history.

A movement grounded in the unconditional love of God for the world -
and a movement mandating people to live that love, and in so doing to
change not only their lives but the very life of the world itself.

I'm talking about power, Real power, Power to change the world.

If you don't believe me, well, there were some old slaves in America's
Antebellum South who explained the dynamic power of love and why it has
the power to transform.

"They explained it this way, They sang a spiritual, even in the midst
of their captivity, It's one that says 'There is a balm in Gilead ...' a
healing balm, something that can make things right.

"'There is a balm in Gilead to make the wounded whole, there is a balm
in Gilead to heal the sin-sick soul.'

"And one of the stanzas actually explains why, They said： 'If you
cannot preach like Peter, and you cannot pray like Paul, you just tell
the love of Jesus, how he died to save us all."'

"Oh, that's the balm in Gilead! This way of love, it is the way of life,
They got it, He died to save us all.

"He didn't die for anything he could get out of it, Jesus did not get
an honorary doctorate for dying, He didn't ... he wasn't getting anything
out of it, He gave up his life, he sacrificed his life, for the good of
others, for the good of the other, for the wellbeing of the world ... for us.

That's what love is, Love is not selfish and self-centered, Love can be
sacrificial, and in so doing, becomes redemptive, And that way of unselfish,
sacrificial, redemptive love changes lives, and it can change this world.

"If you don't believe me, just stop and imagine, Think and imagine a
world where love is the way."

Imagine our homes and families where love is the way, Imagine neighborhoods
and communities where love is the way.

Imagine governments and nations where love is the way, Imagine business
and commerce where this love is the way.

Imagine this tired old world where love is the way, When love is the way --
unselfish, sacrificial, redemptive.

When love is the way, then no child will go to bed hungry in this world
ever again.

When love is the way, we will let justice roll down like a mighty stream
and righteousness like an ever-flowing brook.

When love is the way, poverty will become history, When love is the way,
the earth will be a sanctuary.

When love is the way, we will lay down our swords and shields, down by
the riverside, to study war no more.

When love is the way, there's plenty good room -- plenty good room --
for all of God's children.

"Because when love is the way, we actually treat each other, well ... like
we are actually family.

When love is the way, we know that God is the source of us all, and we
are brothers and sisters, children of God.

My brothers and sisters, that's a new heaven, a new earth, a new world,
a new human family.

And let me tell you something, old Solomon was right in the Old Testament：
that's fire.

Pierre Teilhard de Chardin -- and with this I will sit down, we gotta get
you all married -- French Jesuit Pierre Teilhard de Chardin was arguably
one of the great minds, great spirits of the 20th century.

Jesuit, Roman Catholic priest, scientist, a scholar, a mystic.

In some of his writings, he said, from his scientific background as well
as his theological one, in some of his writings he said -- as others have --
that the discovery, or invention, or harnessing of fire was one of the
great scientific and technological discoveries in all of human history.

Fire to a great extent made human civilization possible, Fire made it
possible to cook food and to provide sanitary ways of eating which reduced
the spread of disease in its time.

Fire made it possible to heat warm environments and thereby made human
migration around the world a possibility, even into colder climates.

Fire made it possible -- there was no Bronze Age without fire, no Iron
Age without fire, no Industrial Revolution without fire.

The advances of fire and technology are greatly dependent on the human
ability and capacity to take fire and use it for human good.

Anybody get here in a car today? An automobile? Nod your heads if you did --
I know there were some carriages, But those of us who came in cars, fire --
the controlled, harnessed fire -- made that possible.

I know that the Bible says, and I believe it, that Jesus walked on the
water, But I have to tell you, I did not walk across the Atlantic Ocean
to get here.

Controlled fire in that plane got me here, Fire makes it possible for us
to text and tweet and email and Instagram and Facebook and socially be
dysfunctional with each other.

Fire makes all of that possible, and de Chardin said fire was one of the
greatest discoveries in all of human history.

And he then went on to say that if humanity ever harnesses the energy
of fire again, if humanity ever captures the energy of love -- it will be
the second time in history that we have discovered fire.

Dr King was right： we must discover love -- the redemptive power of love,
And when we do that, we will make of this old world, a new world.

My brother, my sister, God love you, God bless you, and may God hold us
all in those almighty hands of love.
