---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XVII
    Page: 48
Title: That a Very contemplative list not meddle him with active life,
  nor of anything that is done or spoken about him, nor yet to answer
  to his blamers in excusing of himself
---
In the gospel of Saint Luke it is written, that when our Lord was in the
house of Martha her sister, all the time that Martha made her busy about
the dighting of His meat, Mary her sister sat at His feet. And in hearing of
His word she beheld not to the business of her sister, although her business
was full good and full holy, for truly it is the first part of active life;
nor yet to the preciousness of His blessed body, nor to the sweet voice and
the words of His manhood, although it is better and holier, for it is the
second part of active life and the first of contemplative life.

But to the sovereignest wisdom of His Godhead lapped in the dark words of
His manhood, thither beheld she with all the love of her heart. For from
thence she would not remove, for nothing that she saw nor heard spoken nor
done about her; but sat full still in her body, with many a sweet privy
and a listy love pressed upon that high cloud of unknowing betwixt her and
her God. For one thing I tell thee, that there was never yet pure creature
in this life, nor never yet shall be, so high ravished in contemplation and
love of the Godhead, that there is not evermore a high and a wonderful cloud
of unknowing betwixt him and his God. In this cloud it was that Mary was
occupied with many a privy love pressed. And why? Because it was the best
and the holiest part of contemplation that may be in this life, and from
this part her list not remove for nothing. Insomuch, that when her sister
Martha complained to our Lord of her, and bade Him bid her sister rise and
help her and let her not so work and travail by herself, she sat full still
and answered not with one word, nor shewed not as much as a grumbling gesture
against her sister for any plaint that she could make. And no wonder： for
why, she had another work to do that Martha wist not of. And therefore she
had no leisure to listen to her, nor to answer her at her plaint.

Lo! friend, all these works, these words, and these gestures, that were
shewed betwixt our Lord and these two sisters, be set in ensample of all
actives and all contemplatives that have been since in Holy Church, and
shall be to the day of doom. For by Mary is understood all contemplatives;
for they should conform their living after hers. And by Martha, actives on
the same manner; and for the same reason in likeness.
