---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "10 - ䷉ - Lu"
    Line: 5
    Page: 76-78
  Source:
    Title: The Thousand and One Nights
Format: mixed
---
Then one of the chief officers of the King arose, and said： “0 King,
give up to me the blood of this sage; for we have not seen him commit
any offense against thee; nor have we seen him do aught but cure thee of
thy disease, which wearied the other physicians and sages.” The King
answered： “Ye know not the reason wherefore I would kill the sage. It
is this, that if I suffered him to live, I should myself inevitably perish;
for he who cured me of the disease under which I suffered by a thing that
I held in my hand, may kill me by a thing that I may smell; and I fear
that he would do so, and would receive an appointment on account of it;
seeing that it is probable he is a spy who hath come hither to kill me;
I must therefore kill him, and then shall I feel myself safe.”

The sage then said again： “Spare me, and so may God spare thee;
and destroy me not, lest God destroy thee.”

But he now felt certain that the King would put him to death, and that
there was no escape for him; so he said： “0 King, if my death is
indispensable, grant me some respite, that I may return to my house, and
acquit myself of my duties, and give directions to my family and neighbors
to bury me, and dispose of my medical books; and among my books is one of
the most especial value, which I offer as a present to thee, that thou
mayest treasure in thy library.” “And what," said the King, “is
this book?” He answered： “It contains things not to be enumerated;
and the smallest of the secret virtues that it possesses is this： that,
when thou hast cut off my head, if thou open this book, and count three
leaves, and then read three lines on the page to the left, the head will
speak to thee, and answer whatever thou shalt ask.” At this the King
was excessively astonished, and shook with delight, and said to him：
“0 Sage, when I have cut off thy head will it speak?” He answered：
“Yes, 0 King, and this is a wonderful thing.”

The King then sent him in the custody of guards, and the sage descended to
his house, and settled all his affairs on that day; and on the following
day he went up to the court; and the Emirs and Viziers, and Chamberlains
and Deputies, and all the great officers of the state, went thither also;
and the court resembled a flower-garden. And when the sage had entered,
he presented himself before the King, bearing an old book, and a small pot
containing a powder; and he sat down and said： “Bring me a tray.”
So they brought him one; and he poured out the powder into it. He then
said： “0 King, take this book, and do nothing with it until thou hast
cut off my head; and when thou hast done so, place it upon this tray,
and order some one to press it down upon the powder; and when this is
done, the blood will be staunched; then open the book.” As soon as the
sage had said this, the King gave orders to strike off his head; and it
was done. The King then opened the book, and found that its leaves were
stuck together; so he put his finger to his mouth, and moistened it with
his spittle, and opened the first leaf, and the second, and the third,
but the leaves were not opened without difficulty. He opened six leaves,
and looked at them; but found upon them no writing. So he said： “0
Sage, there is nothing written in it.” The head of the sage answered：
“Turn over more leaves.” The King did so; and in a little while the
poison penetrated into his system; for the book was poisoned; and the
King fell back and cried： “The poison hath penetrated into me!” --
and upon this, the head of the sage Duban repeated these verses：

  They made use of their power, and used it tyrannically;
    and soon it became as though it never
    had existed.
  Had they acted equitably, they had experienced
    equity; but they oppressed, wherefore fortune
    oppressed them with calamities and trials.
  Then did the case announce to them, This is the reward
    of your conduct, and fortune is blameless.

And when the head of the sage Duban had uttered these words, the King
immediately fell down dead.
