---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: IV
    Page: 27-29
Title: Of the shortness of this word, and how it may not be come to by
  curiosity of wit, nor by imagination.
---
But for this, that thou shalt not err in this working and ween that it be
otherwise than it is, I shall tell thee a little more thereof, as me thinketh.

This work asketh no long time or it be once truly done, as some men ween;
for it is the shortest work of all that man may imagine. It is never longer,
nor shorter, than is an atom： the which atom, by the definition of true
philosophers in the science of astronomy, is the least part of time. And
it is so little that for the littleness of it, it is indivisible and nearly
incomprehensible. This is that time of the which it is written： All time
that is given to thee, it shall be asked of thee, how thou hast dispended
it. And reasonable thing it is that thou give account of it： for it is
neither longer nor shorter, but even according to one only stirring that is
within the principal working might of thy soul, the which is thy will. For
even so many willings or desirings, and no more nor no fewer, may be and
are in one hour in thy will, as are atoms in one hour. And if thou wert
reformed by grace to the first state of man’s soul, as it was before sin,
then thou shouldest evermore by help of that grace be lord of that stirring
or of those stirrings. So that none went forby, but all they should stretch
into the sovereign desirable, and into the highest willable thing： the
which is God. For He is even meet to our soul by measuring of His Godhead;
and our soul even meet unto Him by worthiness of our creation to His image
and to His likeness. And He by Himself without more, and none but He, is
sufficient to the full and much more to fulfil the will and the desire of
our soul. And our soul by virtue of this reforming grace is made sufficient
to the full to comprehend all Him by love, the which is incomprehensible
to all created knowledgeable powers, as is angel, or man’s soul; I mean,
by their knowing, and not by their loving. And therefore I call them in
this case knowledgeable powers. But yet all reasonable creatures, angel
and man, have in them each one by himself, one principal working power,
the which is called a knowledgeable power, and another principal working
power, the which is called a loving power. Of the which two powers, to the
first, the which is a knowledgeable power, God that is the maker of them is
evermore incomprehensible; and to the second, the which is the loving power,
in each one diversely He is all comprehensible to the full. Insomuch that a
loving soul alone in itself, by virtue of love should comprehend in itself
Him that is sufficient to the full-and much more, without comparison-to fill
all the souls and angels that ever may be. And this is the endless marvellous
miracle of love; the working of which shall never take end, for ever shall
He do it, and never shall He cease for to do it. See who by grace see may,
for the feeling of this is endless bliss, and the contrary is endless pain.

And therefore whoso were reformed by grace thus to continue in keeping of
the stirrings of his will, should never be in this life -- as he may not
be without these stirrings in nature -- without some taste of the endless
sweetness, and in the bliss of heaven without the full food. And therefore
have no wonder though I stir thee to this work. For this is the work, as
thou shalt hear afterward, in the which man should have continued if he never
had sinned： and to the which working man was made, and all things for man,
to help him and further him thereto, and by the which working a man shall be
repaired again. And for the defailing of this working, a man falleth evermore
deeper and deeper in sin, and further and further from God. And by keeping
and continual working in this work only without more, a man evermore riseth
higher and higher from sin, and nearer and nearer unto God.

And therefore take good heed unto time, how that thou dispendest it： for
nothing is more precious than time. In one little time, as little as it is,
may heaven be won and lost. A token it is that time is precious： for God,
that is given of time, giveth never two times together, but each one after
other. And this He doth, for He will not reverse the order or the ordinal
course in the cause of His creation. For time is made for man, and not man
for time.

And therefore God, that is the ruler of nature, will not in His giving of
time go before the stirring of nature in man’s soul; the which is even
according to one time only. So that man shall have none excusation against
God in the Doom, and at the giving of account of dispending of time, saying,
“Thou givest two times at once, and I have but one stirring at once.”

But sorrowfully thou sayest now, “How shall I do? and sith this is thus
that thou sayest, how shall I give account of each time severally; I that
have unto this day, now of four and twenty years age, never took heed of
time? If I would now amend it, thou wottest well, by very reason of thy words
written before, it may not be after the course of nature, nor of common grace,
that I should now heed or else make satisfaction, for any more times than
for those that be for to come. Yea, and moreover well I wot by very proof,
that of those that be to come I shall on no wise, for abundance of frailty
and slowness of spirits, be able to observe one of an hundred. So that I am
verily concluded in these reasons. Help me now for the love of JESUS!”

Right well hast thou said, for the love of JESUS. For in the love of JESUS;
there shall be thine help. Love is such a power, that it maketh all thing
common. Love therefore JESUS; and all thing that He hath, it is thine. He by
His Godhead is maker and giver of time. He by His manhood is the very keeper of
time. And He by His Godhead and His manhood together, is the truest Doomsman,
and the asker of account of dispensing of time. Knit thee therefore to Him,
by love and by belief, and then by virtue of that knot thou shalt be common
perceiver with Him, and with all that by love so be knitted unto Him： that
is to say, with our Lady Saint Mary that full was of all grace in keeping
of time, with all the angels of heaven that never may lose time, and with
all the saints in heaven and in earth, that by the grace of JESUS heed time
full justly in virtue of love. Lo! here lieth comfort; construe thou clearly,
and pick thee some profit. But of one thing I warn thee amongst all other. I
cannot see who may truly challenge community thus with JESUS and His just
Mother, His high angels and also with His saints; but if he be such an one,
that doth that in him is with helping of grace in keeping of time. So that
he be seen to be a profiter on his part, so little as is, unto the community;
as each one of them doth on his.

And therefore take heed to this work, and to the marvellous manner of it
within in thy soul. For if it be truly conceived, it is but a sudden stirring,
and as it were unadvised, speedily springing unto God as a sparkle from the
coal. And it is marvellous to number the stirrings that may be in one hour
wrought in a soul that is disposed to this work. And yet in one stirring of
all these, he may have suddenly and perfectly forgotten all created thing.
But fast after each stirring, for corruption of the flesh, it falleth down
again to some thought or to some done or undone deed. But what thereof? For
fast after, it riseth again as suddenly as it did before.

And here may men shortly conceive the manner of this working, and clearly
know that it is far from any fantasy, or any false imagination or quaint
opinion： the which be brought in, not by such a devout and a meek blind
stirring of love, but by a proud, curious, and an imaginative wit. Such a
proud, curious wit behoveth always be borne down and stiffly trodden down
under foot, if this work shall truly be conceived in purity of spirit. For
whoso heareth this work either be read or spoken of, and weeneth that it may,
or should, be come to by travail in their wits, and therefore they sit and
seek in their wits how that it may be, and in this curiosity they travail
their imagination peradventure against the course of nature, and they feign a
manner of working the which is neither bodily nor ghostly -- truly this man,
whatsoever he be, is perilously deceived. Insomuch, that unless God of His
great goodness shew His merciful miracle, and make him soon to leave work,
and meek him to counsel of proved workers, he shall fall either into frenzies,
or else into other great mischiefs of ghostly sins and devils’ deceits;
through the which he may lightly be lost, both life and soul, without any
end. And therefore for God’s love be wary in this work, and travail not in
thy wits nor in thy imagination on nowise： for I tell thee truly, it may not
be come to by travail in them, and therefore leave them and work not with them.

And ween not, for I call it a darkness or a cloud, that it be any cloud
congealed of the humours that flee in the air, nor yet any darkness such as
is in thine house on nights when the candle is out. For such a darkness and
such a cloud mayest thou imagine with curiosity of wit, for to bear before
thine eyes in the lightest day of summer： and also contrariwise in the
darkest night of winter, thou mayest imagine a clear shining light. Let be
such falsehood. I mean not thus. For when I say darkness, I mean a lacking
of knowing： as all that thing that thou knowest not, or else that thou
hast forgotten, it is dark to thee; for thou seest it not with thy ghostly
eye. And for this reason it is not called a cloud of the air, but a cloud
of unknowing, that is betwixt thee and thy God.
