---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: I
    Page: 24
Title: Of four degrees of Christian men’s living; and of the course of
  his calling that this book was made unto.
---
Ghostly friend in God, thou shalt well understand that I find, in my boisterous
beholding, four degrees and forms of Christian men’s living： and they
be these, Common, Special, Singular, and Perfect. Three of these may be
begun and ended in this life; and the fourth may by grace be begun here,
but it shall ever last without end in the bliss of Heaven. And right as thou
seest how they be set here in order each one after other; first Common, then
Special, after Singular, and last Perfect, right so me thinketh that in the
same order and in the same course our Lord hath of His great mercy called
thee and led thee unto Him by the desire of thine heart. For first thou
wottest well that when thou wert living in the common degree of Christian
men’s living in company of thy worldly friends, it seemeth to me that
the everlasting love of His Godhead, through the which He made thee and
wrought thee when thou wert nought, and sithen bought thee with the price
of His precious blood when thou wert lost in Adam, might not suffer thee to
be so far from Him in form and degree of living. And therefore He kindled
thy desire full graciously, and fastened by it a leash of longing, and led
thee by it into a more special state and form of living, to be a servant
among the special servants of His; where thou mightest learn to live more
specially and more ghostly in His service than thou didst, or mightest do,
in the common degree of living before. And what more?

Yet it seemeth that He would not leave thee thus lightly, for love of His
heart, the which He hath evermore had unto thee since thou wert aught：
but what did He? Seest thou nought how Mistily and how graciously He hath
privily pulled thee to the third degree and manner of living, the which
is called Singular? In the which solitary form and manner of living, thou
mayest learn to lift up the foot of thy love; and step towards that state
and degree of living that is perfect, and the last state of all.
