---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 8 - ䷇ - Pi
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 64-65
By: Odd Nansen
---
Francis, however, was not so easy to break, even if his physique was far
from being that of a Viking. He has no beard, neither is he rough-looking. On
the contrary, he is clean-shaven and well-groomed. He looks like the kindest
man on the earth -- and that he well may be. A wholehearted Norwegian more
than anyone else. No matter what he may be doing, his manners are always
gentle and graceful, and what he says he says mildly and with amiability,
even if it is not always meant that way. Francis is far from being “a
softy.” While he was in prison, often we heard his friends and others
outside say, “Poor Francis!” “What on earth is going to happen to
Francis?” “How is Francis going to endure imprisonment? He isn’t very
strong, you know,” and they all shook their worried heads and thought
that this would be the end of Francis. Never have such words been more
unwarranted, in spite of the fact that his imprisonment lasted for such a
long time. No one kept his colors flying more bravely the whole time than
he. And furthermore he helped thousands of fellow prisoners to do the same.

Francis had not been long at Grini before he started his task. Some
prisoners wanted him to tell about Bjo"rnson, others about Ibsen
or Wergeland. Some even wanted to hear about Shakespeare, Dante,
Cervantes, and Voltaire; others about the Greek and Roman classics,
and Francis lectured generously and lavishly. He never said no. Like
everything else at Grini, lecturing was strictly forbidden. This made,
however, no difference to Francis. On the contrary it made his task
all the more attractive to him. He started one series of lectures after
another. Some of them were given during working hours on the job where
Francis “worked,” others in the barrack rooms at night. No less than
thirteen hundred lectures of this kind were delivered by Francis during
the time of his imprisonment. In addition to these more formal lectures he
made numerous impromptu speeches. There were many occasions which called
for celebration, such as Christmas, New Year’s, the seventeenth of May,
and also the gloomy days when a prisoner transport left for Germany. Francis
was always on the spot with words for the day, words that came from the
heart, words that never will be forgotten by those who heard them.

Outstanding among his speeches was the one he gave at Christmas 1941,
when he talked about Yule as we find it in Norwegian lyrics, and finished
up by telling the tale of "Jutulen and Johannes Blessom.” One will never
forget the last immortal sentence, which became a catchword to prisoners
at Grini, “You will have to stand it, Blessom.”
