---
By: Rumi
Source:
  URL: http://www.khamush.com/divani_shams.htm
  Locus:
    Date: 28 February 2018
  Source:
    Translator: R. A. Nicholson
    Title: Selected Powms from the Divani Shamsi Tabriz
    Copyright: 1898
    Source:
      Title: Divani Shamsi Tabriz
      Chapter: XXXVII
---
I have heard that thou dost intend to travel： do not so.
That thou bestowest thy love on a new friend and companion： do nut so.
Tho'in the world thou art strange, thou hast never known estrangement;
What heart-stricken wretch art thou attempting? do not so.
Steal not thyself away from me, go not to aliens;
Thou art stealthily glancing at another： do not so.
O moon for whose sake the heavens are bewildered,
Thou makest me distraught and bewildered： do not so.
Where is the pledge and where the compact thou didst make with me?
Thou departest from thy word and pledge： do not so.
Why give promises and why utter protestations,
Why make a shield of vows and blandishments? do not so.
O thou whose vestibule is above existence and nonexistence,
At this moment thou art passing from existence： do not so.
O thou whose command Hell and Paradise obey,
Thou art making Paradise like Hell-fire to me： do not so.
In thy plot of sugar-canes I am secure from poison;
Thou minglest the poison with the sugar： do not so,
My soul is like a fiery furnace, yet it sufficed thee not;
By absence thou art making my face pale as gold： do not so.
When thou withdrawest thy countenance, the moon is darkened with grief.
Thou art intending the eclipse of the moon's orb： do not so.
Our lips become dry when thou bringest a drought;
Why art thou moistening mine eye with tears? do not so.
Since thou canst not endure the reasoning faculty of lovers,
When why dost thou dazzle the eye of reason? do not so.
Thou art denying sweetmeats to one sick of abstinence;
Thou art making thy patient worse： do not so.
My lawless eye is a thief of thy beauty.
O Beloved, thou tak'st vengeance on my thievish sight： do not so.
Withdraw, comrade,'tis no time for speech;
In love's bewilderment why dost thou intrude thyself? do not so.
Except the beauty of Shamsi Din, the pride of Tabriz,
If so be that thou throwest a glance upon (aught in) the two worlds, do not
 so.
