---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Imprisonment
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 334-336
  Source:
    Title: On Judaism
By: Martin Buber
References:
  - Title: Psalms
    Locus: 82
  - Title: Job
---
The Bible knows of God’s hiding His face, of times when the contact between
heaven and earth seems to be interrupted. God seems to withdraw Himself
utterly from the earth and no longer to participate in its existence. The
space of history is then full of noise, but empty of the divine breath. For
one who believes in the living God, who knows about Him, and is fated to
spend his life in a time of His hiddenness, it is very difficult to live.

There is a psalm, the 82nd, in which life in a time of God’s hiddenness
is described in a picture of startling cruelty. It is assumed that God
has entrusted the government of mankind to a host of angels and commanded
them to realize justice on earth and to protect the weak, the poor, and
the helpless from the encroachments of the wrongdoers. But they “judge
unjustly” and “respect the persons of the wicked.” Now the Psalmist
envisions how God draws the unfaithful angels before His seat, judges
them, and passes sentence upon them： they are to become mortal. But the
Psalmist awakes from his vision and looks about him： iniquity still
reigns on earth with unlimited power. And he cries to God： “Arise,
O God, judge the earth?"

This cry is to be understood as a late, but even more powerful, echo of
that bold speech of the patriarch arguing with God： “The judge of
all the earth, will He not do justice?!” It reinforces and augments
that speech; its implication is： Will He allow injustice to reign
further? And so the cry transmitted to us by Scripture becomes our own
cry, which bursts from our hearts and rises to our lips in a time of
God’s hiddenness. For this is what the biblical word does to us： it
confronts us with the human address as one that in spite of everything
is heard and in spite ofeverything may expect an answer.

In this our own time, one asks again and again： How is a Jewish life
still possible after Auschwitz? I would like to frame this question more
correctly： how is a life with God still possible in a time in which there
is an Auschwitz? The estrangement has become too cruel, the hiddenness too
deep. One can still “believe” in the God who allowed those things to
happen, but can one still speak to Him? Can one still hear His word? Can
one still, as an individual and as a people, enter at all into a dialogic
relationship with Him? Can one still call to Him? Dare we recommend to
the survivors of Auschwitz, the Job of the gas chambers： “Give thanks
unto the Lord, for He is good; for His mercy endureth forever”?

But how about Job himself? He not only laments, but he charges that the
“cruel” God (30：21) has “removed his right” from him (27：2)
and thus that the judge of all the earth acts against justice. And he
receives an answer from God. But what God says to him does not answer the
charge; it does not even touch upon it. The true answer that Iob receives
is God’s appearance only, only this that distance turns into nearness,
that “his eye sees Him” (42：5), that he knows Him again. Nothing
is explained, nothing adjusted; wrong has not become right, nor cruelty
kindness. Nothing has happened but that man again hears God’s address.

The mystery has remained unsolved, but it has become his, it has become
man’s.

And we?

We -- by that is meant all those who have not got over what happened and
will not get over it. How is it with us." Do we stand overcome before
the hidden face of God like the tragic hero of the Greeks before faceless
fate? No, rather even now we contend, we too, with God, even with Him, the
Lord of Being, whom we once, we here, chose for our Lord. We do not put
up with earthly being; we struggle for its redemption, and struggling we
appeal to the help of‘our Lord, who is again and still a hiding one. In
such a state we await His voice, whether it comes out of the storm or out
ofa stillness that follows it. Though His coming appearance resemble no
earlier one, we shall recognize again our cruel and merciful Lord.
