---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 24
  Source:
    Title: No Man Is an Island
By: Thomas Merton
---
The fact that our being necessarily demands to be expressed in action
should not lead us to believe that as soon as we stop acting we cease to
exist. We do not live merely in order to “do something” -- no matter
what. Activity is just one of the normal expressions oflife, and the life
it expresses is all the more perfect when it sustains itselfwith an ordered
economy ofaction. This order demands a wise alternation of activity and
rest. We do not live more fully merely by doing more, seeing more, tasting
more, and experiencing more than we ever have before. On the contrary, some
of us need to discover that we will not begin to live more fully until we
have the courage to do and see and taste and experience much less than usual.

A tourist may go through a museum with a Baedeker, looking conscientiously
at everything important, and come out less alive than when he went in. He
has looked at everything and seen nothing. He has done a great deal and it
has only made him tired, lfhe had stopped for a moment to look at one picture
he really liked and forgotten about all the others, he might console himself
with the thought that he had not completely wasted his time. He would have
discovered something not only outside himself but in himself. He would have
become aware ofa new level of being in himselfand his life would have been
increased by a new capacity for being and for doing.

Our being is not to be enriched merely by activity or experience as such.
Everything depends on the quality of our acts and our experiences. A multitude
of badly performed actions and of experiences only half-lived exhausts
and depletes our being. By doing things badly we make ourselves less real.
This growing unreality cannot help but make us unhappy and fill us with a
sense ofguilt. But the purity ofour conscience has a natural proportion
with the depth of our being and the quality of our acts： and when our
activity is habitually disordered, our malformed conscience can think of
nothing better to tell us than to multiply the quantity of our acts, without
perfecting their quality. And so we go from bad to worse, exhaust ourselves,
empty our whole life ofall content, and fall into despair.

There are times, then, when in order to keep ourselves in existence at all
we simply have to sit back for a while and do nothing. And for a man who has
let himself be drawn completely out of himself by his activity, nothing is
more difficult than to sit still and rest, doing nothing at all. The very
act of resting is the hardest and most courageous act he can perform： and
often it is quite beyond his power.

We must first recover the possession ofour own being before we can act wisely
or taste any experience in its human reality. As long as we are not in our
own possession, all our activity is futile. If we let all our wine run out
of the barrel and down the street, how will our thirst be quenched?
