---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LXVIII
    Page: 111
Title: That nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly; and how our outer man
  calleth the word of this book nought
---
And on the same manner, where another man would bid thee gather thy powers
and thy wits wholly within thyself, and worship God there -- although he say
full well and full truly, yea! and no man trulier, an he be well conceived
-- yet for fear of deceit and bodily conceiving of his words, me list not
bid thee do so. But thus will I bid thee. Look on nowise that thou be within
thyself. And shortly, without thyself will I not that thou be, nor yet above,
nor behind, nor on one side, nor on other.

“Where then,” sayest thou, “shall I be? Nowhere, by thy tale!”
Now truly thou sayest well; for there would I have thee. For why, nowhere
bodily, is everywhere ghostly. Look then busily that thy ghostly work be
nowhere bodily; and then wheresoever that that thing is, on the which thou
wilfully workest in thy mind in substance, surely there art thou in spirit,
as verily as thy body is in that place that thou art bodily. And although
thy bodily wits can find there nothing to feed them on, for them think it
nought that thou dost, yea! do on then this nought, and do it for God’s
love. And let not therefore, but travail busily in that nought with a waking
desire to will to have God that no man may know. For I tell thee truly,
that I had rather be so nowhere bodily, wrestling with that blind nought,
than to be so great a lord that I might when I would be everywhere bodily,
merrily playing with all this ought as a lord with his own.

Let be this everywhere and this ought, in comparison or this nowhere and
this nought. Reck thee never if thy wits cannot reason of this nought; for
surely, I love it much the better. It is so worthy a thing in itself, that
they cannot reason thereupon. This nought may better be felt than seen：
for it is full blind and full dark to them that have but little while looked
thereupon. Nevertheless, if I shall soothlier say, a soul is more blinded
in feeling of it for abundance of ghostly light, than for any darkness
or wanting of bodily light. What is he that calleth it nought? Surely it
is our outer man, and not our inner. Our inner man calleth it All; for of
it he is well learned to know the reason of all things bodily or ghostly,
without any special beholding to any one thing by itself.
