---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 910-911
Tags:
  - 910
  - 126b
  - 749
  - 288
  - 271
  - 83
  - 902
  - 346
  - 832
Commentary: |
  This observation has its alchemical analogy： ‘Gold, which represents
  the true equilibrium of metallic qualities, lacks nevertheless the
  particular utility of this or that base metal, just as the spiritual man,
  who synthesizes the human virtues and who therefore is incorruptible like
  gold, may seem wanting in social virtues' (Burckhardt. ‘Considérations
  sur l'Alchimie’. Éludes Trad., 1948, p. 298).
Reference:
  - Body: The children of this world are in their generation wiser than the
      children of light.
    Title: St Luke
    Locus: XVI 8
By: Eckhart
---
When a man has reached this point we may well say, this man is God and
man. All Christ has by nature he has won by grace. His body is filled with
the noble nature of the soul, which she receives from God, with divine light,
wherefore we may truly cry, Behold, a man divine! Pity them, my children, they
are from home and no one knows them. Let those in quest of God be careful lest
appearances deceive them in these people who are peculiar and hard to place;
no one rightly knows them but those in whom the same light shines. Namely,
the light of truth. Yet it may well be that wayfarers to that same good,
but who have not yet reached it, will come across these perfect of whom we
have been speaking. Believe me, did I know one such, and had a convent-full
of gold and precious stones, I would give the whole of it for a single fowl
for him to eat. Further I declare, if all the things God ever made were mine,
I would forwith give them all for the enjoyment of that man, and rightly, for
they are all his. Nay, more I say： his, too, is God in the fullness of his
power, and if there stood before me all who in imperfection are anhungered,
I would not withhold from that man’s need a single feather of the fowl,
though I might feed that multitude. For, you must remember, with one in
imperfection, anything he eats or drinks will drag him down and make him
prone to sin. But not the virtuous man; what he eats and drinks he raises
up in Christ to the Father. So look well to yourselves.

\... I warn you, you must keep a sharp look out, for they are difficult
to tell; thus if they should need it, while other people fast they will be
eating, while other people watch they will be sleeping, while other folks
are praying they will hold their peace. In short, the things they say and
do seem unaccountable, for what God makes obvious to persons on the way to
their eternal happiness is foreign to those that have arrived there. These
have no wants whatever; they are rich in the possession of a city of their
own. I call that my own which is mine eternally and no one can take from
me. These people, you must know, do most valuable work. They work within, you
understand, in the man of the soul. Blessed is the kingdom wherein dwells one
of them; in an instant they will do more lasting good than all the outward
actions ever done. See ye withhold not aught of theirs. May we recognise
these people and loving God in them, with them possess the city they have won.
