---
Source:
  URL: https://tricycle.org/trikedaily/satipatthana-sutta-mindfulness/
  Translator: Thanissaro Bhikkhu
  Locus:
    Date: 5 March 2018
    Section: III
  Source:
    Title: Satipatthana Sutta
    ID: 34a30556-7dcf-465e-a9a7-7b3ac1f0f124
Title: Feelings
By: Gautama Buddha
Commentary: |
  Feelings of the flesh are the simple pains, pleasures, etc., that arise
  willy-nilly at the senses including the mind as the sixth sense. Feelings
  not of the flesh are those that you deliberately bring into being with
  regard to the practice. A pain not of the flesh would be the pain that
  comes from the thought that you still have further to go in practice
  and have not yet reached your goal. A pleasure not of the flesh would
  be the pleasure that comes from getting the mind into a solid state of
  concentration, called jhana. The Buddha recommends developing both these
  sorts of feelings-the pain, as a way of motivating yourself to practice
  more seriously; the pleasure, as a way of giving the mind nourishment and
  shelter along the path.
---
“And how does a monk remain focused on feelings in and of themselves? There
is the case where a monk, when feeling a painful feeling, discerns,
‘I am feeling a painful feeling.’ When feeling a pleasant feeling,
he discerns, ‘I am feeling a pleasant feeling.’ When feeling a
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he discerns, ‘I am feeling a
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.’

“When feeling a painful feeling of the flesh, he discerns, ‘I am feeling
a painful feeling of the flesh.’ When feeling a painful feeling not of the
flesh, he discerns, ‘I am feeling a painful feeling not of the flesh.’
When feeling a pleasant feeling of the flesh, he discerns, ‘I am feeling
a pleasant feeling of the flesh.’ When feeling a pleasant feeling not
of the flesh, he discerns, ‘I am feeling a pleasant feeling not of the
flesh.’ When feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling of the flesh,
he discerns, ‘I am feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling of
the flesh.’ When feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling not of
the flesh, he discerns, ‘I am feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling not of the flesh.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on feelings in and of
themselves, or externally on feelings in and of themselves, or both
internally and externally on feelings in and of themselves. Or he remains
focused on the phenomenon of origination with regard to feelings, on the
phenomenon of passing away with regard to feelings, or on the phenomenon
of origination and passing away with regard to feelings. Or his mindfulness
that ‘There are feelings’ is maintained to the extent of knowledge and
remembrance. And he remains independent, unsustained by [not clinging to]
anything in the world. This is how a monk remains focused on feelings in
and of themselves.
