---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Divine Mothers
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 262-269
  Source:
    Title: Hidden Journey
    SubTitle: A Spiritual Awakening
By: Andrew Harvey
---
Early the next morning I read for the first time these words in Aurobindo：
“Love is a passion and it seeks for two things, eternity and intensity,
and in the relation of the lover and the Beloved the seeking for eternity
and for intensity is instinctive and self-born. ... Passing beyond desire
for possession, which means a difference, it is a seeking for oneness,
of two souls merging into each other."

I wrote Aurobindo’s words down in the yellow notebook I had with me,
realizing I had been given them as a sign and a task. I had recognized
something none of the lies or evasions of the years to come could entirely
efface; recognized, as if by the light of one of those lightnings that
had broken from her body, that She was my soul’s Beloved, and that the
meaning of my life lay in love for Her.

On the walk to Ma's house next morning I wondered how she would next
appear. She was sitting on the veranda, shelling peas with Adilakshmi. Her
hair was down, and she was rubbing her eyes a little sleepily.

I sat down by them. After a while Ma went in, and Adilakshmi and
I went on shelling the peas. That morning we had our first long
conversation. Adilakshmi is a stately, radiant woman, then in her middle
thirties. She wore a deep gold sari and gold bangles on both wrists,
which made her very beautiful. I told her so.

“Mother is the beautiful one," she said, looking down.

I asked her ifshe ever wanted to marry.

“No,“ she answered. “I always wanted to live with the Divine,
even as a child. I always knew I would. I used to dream of living on an
ashram. As a young girl I used to dream of living with a god."

She smiled at my astonishment.

“We in India do not think the gods are far. They are all around us. They
walk our streets; they come to us in dreams. I always had to find God,
or die.”

We went on shelling peas. “When I was twenty-five, after getting a
philosophy degree, I just left home. I took a train, saying to myself that
if God existed he would look after me!”

“You mean to tell me that you, a daughter of a good family --”

“Very good family,” Adilakshmi corrected me.

“You mean to tell me you just got onto a train to look for God?"

“Yes,” Adilakshmi said. “With one hundred rupees and no saris. I have
always been mad. Ifl had not been mad, I would never have left home. IfI
had never left home, I would not have found her. So madness is a good
thing, no?”

I nodded helplessly.

“In the train I saw myself protected by lions and tigers."

I started to laugh.

“And where were you going on this heroic train journey protected by
lions and tigers?”

“What did it matter where I was going! The important thing was to leave
home. The most important thing was to find God. Actually I was going to
Pandaripur, a pilgrimage center for Krishna. Suddenly, instead of asking
for a ticket to I’andaripur, I said, ‘Pondicherry.’ I arrived in
I’ondy, went to the ashram, and the first person I met was Mr. Reddy. He
was standing at the ashram gate. He had made a mistake about the time of a
class he was giving (he used to teach Telugu). I looked at him and thought,
This man is the person I am searching for： He will take me to God.”

I stared at Adilakshmi.

“Just like that?“

“JUSt like that. Mr. Reddy took me to his home, where his wife gave me
a sari, and then I came back to the samadhi, the tomb of Aurobindo, where
I had a very, Very beautiful experience." Adilakshmi smiled at the memory.

“I knelt by the tomb and saw clearly a beautiful old man with long
white hair and a fractured leg in splints come toward me and embrace me.“

“You did not know that Aurobindo at the end of his life had a broken
an leg?"

“Of course not. I knew nothing about Aurobindo. Sometime later he gave me
vision after vision ofthe inner meaning of ‘Savitri,’ his poem about
the Mother. He would tell me to look up line so-and-so after the vision,
and there I would see everything I had seen written."

Adilakshmi spoke with the same unnerving directness and simplicity as
did Mr. Reddy.

“Sweet Mother accepted me into the ashram in 1969. I loved her very
much. I was very depressed when she left, the body in 1973. Then Mr. Reddy
told me about Mother Meera." Adilakshmi gazed down at the floor.

“Mr. Reddy is a wonderful man." she said. “He has saved my life many,
many times. Through him I met Ma in 1974.

“The first time I saw Meera I loved her. She was fourteen, so thin
and elegant and smartly dressed. She had such big open eyes. I had always
wanted to give myself to God; I recognized the Divine in her and so decided
to offer her everything. At that time Ma was staying with Mr. Reddy in
Pondy. Every day we would see each other.

“How beautiful those days were! When I wasn’t teaching -- I taught
English at the ashram -- I would be with Mr. Reddy and her. She was
only fourteen, and yet she had the calm and presence of mind of an old
man. Whatever she did she did perfectly. And she was so kind. I felt her
greatness immediately; but it was her humility that made me love her.”

Adilakshmi’s eyes filled with tears, which she brushed away with her gold
sleeve. “To have so much power and be so humble? How is it possible? "

Her tears fell.

“I met Ma again in 1976. When I saw her that time she was wearing a
blue dress. Immediately, with open eyes, I saw her as Krishna.”

“Krishna?” I said, surprised, remembering the experience in Ladakh.

“All forms are the Mother. The Divine Mother has the whole universe
in her." Adilakshmi opened her arms very wide. “All the gods are in
her. Where would the male gods be without the Shakti, the female power
that creates everything? Many people have seen Ma in different forms. Some
as Sri Aurobindo, some as the Virgin Mary. It is normal.”

“Normal?" I laughed.

“Yes,” said Adilakshmi firmly. “One day all the things that seem
so wild and strange to you now will seem normal."

She stood up to go in.

“Isn't it hard, Adilakshmi, to worship Ma? I, too, have seen some small
parts of her power, but how to connect that with the young girl we see
every day, sewing, shopping, walking in the drive?”

Adilakshmi burst out laughing.

“But that is the mystery, isn't it?”

“How do you worship Ma?”

“As she is. Simply as she is."

She turned and was about to leave when I said： “You realize how the
world could view you and Mr. Reddy?”

“Oh, yes,” she said, turning back to face me. “They would see us as
mad fantasists. Two people with a divine dream projecting it onto a small,
innocent girl. Something stupid like that.”

“But how do you know that Ma is divine?” I said in my rational
“Oxford” voice.

Adilakshmi clapped her hands. “How do I know? By continual living
experience. How else? I live with Ma; I see her sometimes twenty-two
hours of the day. I know she is absolutely unlike me. The more I know
her, the deeper I wonder at her. I am not a stupid love-drunk person. I
watch; I observe. Do you imagine I would give up my life to her had
I not known? Would I and Mr. Reddy have risked everything, given up
respectability, money, position, the ashram, our whole world, had we
not been certain?” She paused. “Andrew, I never try to convince
anyone of anything. The great mysteries have to be experienced. They
have to be lived. The only way to reach anyone really is to offer your
life. That is what Ma is doing. She is not talking, justifying. She is
giving herself completely, at every second, in every way. Just giving
herself. Those with eyes to see will see. Those who dare to know will
know. I try to offer my life also."

She paused. “And now I must go in and make lunch.”

I thought, after Adilakshmi had left, of the old woman I had seen at
Mahabalipuram worshipping the lingam as the sea poured over her. The
joy on her face and on Adilakshmi’s were the same joy -- that of
surrender. Adilakshmi and Mr. Reddy had given all they had to Ma. By their
love and its mad courage they had both crossed over into a dimension
of humble happiness. Mr. Reddy and Adilakshmi were both whole human
beings. Their sacrifice -- if that was the right word -- had not made
them narrow or unaware of the world. Adilakshmi’s beauty, exuberance,
and wit were not at all characteristic of the shriveled ashramite women
I had seen. Nothing seemed extinguished in her. And although Mr. Reddy
was sick, his whole being emanated peace.

Seeing their delight so clearly made me sad. Adilakshmi and Mr. Reddy
were so Indian -- Indian in their spiritual passion, their daring, their
exultation in renunciation of the world for God. My Indian childhood made
me understand them intuitively; but my Western training and ambition
distanced me from their innocence. I realized that my road to Ma would
be crooked; it would not have the honest straightness I admired in theirs.

I said this later to Mr. Reddy.

He laughed. “A zigzag path gets there in the end, no? And the best
police, you know, are reformed thieves.”

He tickled my neck. “Don’t always be so serious. Some seriousness is
good. But remember to play with the Mother also.”

He whispered, “I am doing nothing but playing with Ma. Is that a serious
thing for a dignified old man to be doing? Oh, and I used to be so very
serious."

Ma came in and Mr. Reddy said something to her in Telugu. She answered
and then retired.

“What did you say?” I asked.

“I said to Ma, ‘You have made a very happy small boy out of a serious
v and dignified old man."

“And what did Ma say?”

“If I was not always a child, I would never have found the Mother.”

“So Ma wins?"

“Ma always wins. In the great Divine Game, the one who loves most
wins. And who loves more than the Mother?”

Ma reentered and stood by his chair. “Ma,” he said, “Ma, give
me the words to tell this young man how loving you are. Give me words
beautiful enough.”

That night, back at the hotel, I fell quickly into deep sleep. All night in
dreams, the image of a sculpture I had loved in a temple in Mahabalipuram --
of the goddess Durga slaying Mahisasura, the Buffalo demon -- kept coming
back to me, and with such insistence I knew I was being told something. When
I woke, I remembered what I had read in the local guidebook; this sculpture
is the illustration of the “Devi Mahatmyam,” an epic poem about the
Goddess, which I had made a note of to read. I looked all over Kakinada for
a copy of the work and at last, in the most unlikely and grimy of bookshops,
1 found one. It was the last copy, the man said, that he would ever have
in stock. “I am going out of business," he said. “No one reads now.”

The “Devi Mahatmyam” is a glorification ofthe Divine Mother and an
account of her creation and conquest of the supreme asura and demon of
destruction, who threatens the creation.

I sat out in the noisy street and opened it at random.

“By you this universe is borne, by you this world is created. By you
it is proteCted, O Devi, and you always consume it in the end."

I saw Ma sitting with the whole horizon blazing behind her.

I opened the book again. The gods are told that lVIahisasura has usurped
the functions and powers of many of their number and is threatening
the cosmos：

Having thus heard the words of the devas, Vishnu was angry and also Shiva,
and theirfaces became fierce with frowns.

Then issued forth a great lightfrom the face of Vishnu, who was full of
intense anger; andfrom that of Brahma and Shiva, too. From the bodies
of Indra and other devas also sprang forth a very great light. And all this
light united together.

The devas saw there a concentration of light like a mountain blazing
excessively, pervading all the quarters with its flames. Then that unique
light, produced from the bodies of all the devas, pervading the three
worlds with its luster; combined into one and became a female form

Sitting in the dirt, with bicycles ringing around me and car horns blaring,
I felt my body fill with bliss. Then with extreme urgency messages came.

Mahisasura is the madness ofthe human mind without God -- the mind that
is destroying the planet; the mind that made and used the atomic bomb;
the mind that is' everywhere creating a wrecked, starved world in its
own psychic image.

The gods have created me, the Mothei; out of all their dfleirent lights
so this evil can be destroyed. Destroyed not with cruelty but with the
power oflove and gnosis.

I tried to get up three times, but my legs buckled under me. I found
myself, my head in my hands, saying over and over the different names of
the Divine Mother that I knew, Brahmani, Mahesvari, Virgin Mary, Fatima,
Neit, Isis, Saraswati, Kali, Meera.

I am above all names and all worlds and all forms. Open the book again.

I opened to： “Whenever trouble arises...I shall incarnate and destroy
all enemies."

Again I saw Ma： face and body on the roof, the sky on fire behind
her. This time she was smiling with the same triumphant passion as she
had in the doorway in Pondicherry.

Next day I woke up determined to ask Ma for an interview. I had to talk
to her. I had only two days left before I went back to Oxford. I asked
Mr. Reddy to ask Ma for me.

He went into the room where Ma was and returned. “Ma will talk to you
this afternoon.”

I felt sick to the stomach at myself, at all the doubts and fears I knew
still accompanied my love for her. I felt weak, so I sat down in a chair
and put my face in my hands.

Mr. Reddy sat down on the sofa beside me and took my hand.

“All this is very bewildering to the mind,” I said. “I’ve been
given so much. Why can’t I give myself completely?”

I stared at the dark green marble floor, awash in sunlight.

“To give yourself completely to the Mother is complete realization,”
Mr. Reddy whispered. “It can take many lives."

“Everything has to be changed, doesn’t it -- every habit, every way
of thinking.”

“Yes.” He smiled. “It is a long work. But it is the only real
work. And Ma is here to help you. She is here. She is in the other room
as we speak, cooking lunch. Follow her and she will be your Master, your
Mother, your Beloved, your Friend. She will become everything to you
as she has become everything to me. And when she is everything to you,
you will know her in everything.”

He started to cough and looked suddenly frail. He saw me looking at him
with concern and looked back mischievously.

“This illness, too, is only Ma’s play, her maya.”

Either this man is mad, I thought, or he is illumined. There is no other
possible explanation.

“I am not illumined completely,” Mr. Reddy said out loud, reading my
thought. “But Ma has lit some lamps in my brain that nothing can put out."

The hours before seeing her I spent in prayer. I remembered something
Thuksey Rinpoche had once said： “The great enemy to spiritual progress
is the belief you know already. Knowledge is unfolded. Pray to be willing,
at every stage to be ignorant, so you can be really taught.”

How would I learn that ignorance rather than rely on the learned ignorance
of years of habit, assumption, intellectual formulation?

Mr. Reddy, Adilakshmi, and I waited for Ma in the drawing room. A late
red-gold light filled the room.

She came in silently in a white sari, not smiling, and sat in the chair
opposite me, gazing down. I had thought I was calm, until she entered,
but her beauty and her majesty made me tremble.

“Ma,” I began.

“Andrew,” she said, looking up.

As she said my name for the first time a sob arose in me and shook my
entire body. I tried to control it, but my whole being started to weep
before her. The grief of my life's loneliness, guilt, and sexual pain
seemed to seize me and pour itself out at her feet.

I wept for a long time. Slowly, in the huge and healing silence of her
presence, I began to feel calm.

“I came before you with questions. But now I understand I only wanted
to weep before you and sit with you."

Mr. Reddy translated.

Ma smiled.

Another long silence began, golden this time with the light that was
filling the room, covering the chairs, Ma’s hands, the floor between
me and her. I knew I should not speak, just open and wait.

Ma gazed at the pearl ring on her right hand.

A calm bliss filled my body.

The tears began again. This time they were tears of relief and joy, with
no grief in them at all.

I began to speak haltingly.

“You have always been guiding me, haven’t you?"

“Yes.”

“You were in Pondicherry living quietly with Mr. Reddy when I first
came here. It was you who, with Aurobindo, opened my mind; it was you
who prepared me to meet you.”

“Yes.”

“In these last weeks I feel you have been revealing to me your divine
Self. Is this true?”

“Yes.”

“Can I receive your Light?"

“You are receiving it. One day you will see it.”

I trembled. “You have come to save the world, haven’t you?"

“Yes. There are others working here, too.”

“What can I do to help your work?”

“Realize yourself.”

There was nothing else to say. I sat gazing at Ma with astonishment,
and she gazed calmly back. After one last long silence she smiled and rose.

I went over and knelt at her feet.
