---
Source:
  URL: https://tricycle.org/trikedaily/satipatthana-sutta-mindfulness/
  Translator: Thanissaro Bhikkhu
  Locus:
    Date: 5 March 2018
    Section: V
  Source:
    Title: Satipatthana Sutta
    ID: 34a30556-7dcf-465e-a9a7-7b3ac1f0f124
Title: Mental Qualities
By: Gautama Buddha
---
“And how does a monk remain focused on mental qualities in and of
themselves?

“There is the case where a monk remains focused on mental qualities in and
of themselves with reference to the five hindrances. And how does a monk
remain focused on mental qualities in and of themselves with reference to
the five hindrances? There is the case where, there being sensual desire
present within, a monk discerns, ‘There is sensual desire present within
me.’ Or, there being no sensual desire present within, he discerns,
‘There is no sensual desire present within me.’ He discerns how there
is the arising of unarisen sensual desire. And he discerns how there is the
abandoning of sensual desire once it has arisen. And he discerns how there
is no further appearance in the future of sensual desire that has been
abandoned. [The same formula is repeated for the remaining hindrances：
ill will, sloth and drowsiness, restlessness and anxiety, and uncertainty.]

“In this way he remains focused internally on mental qualities in and
of themselves ... This is how a monk remains focused on mental qualities
in and of themselves with reference to the five hindrances.

“And further, the monk remains focused on mental qualities in and of
themselves with reference to the five clinging-aggregates. And how does
a monk remain focused on mental qualities in and of themselves with
reference to the five clinging-aggregates? There is the case where a
monk [discerns]： ‘Such is form, such its origination, such its
disappearance. Such is feeling ... Such is perception ... Such are
fabrications ... Such is consciousness, such its origination, such its
disappearance.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on mental qualities in and
of themselves ... This is how a monk remains focused on mental qualities
in and of themselves with reference to the five clinging-aggregates.

“And further, the monk remains focused on mental qualities in and of
themselves with reference to the sixfold internal and external sense
media. And how does a monk remain focused on mental qualities in and
of themselves with reference to the sixfold internal and external sense
media? There is the case where he discerns the eye, he discerns forms,
he discerns the fetter that arises dependent on both. He discerns how
there is the arising of an unarisen fetter. And he discerns how there
is the abandoning of a fetter once it has arisen. And he discerns how
there is no further appearance in the future of a fetter that has been
abandoned. [The same formula is repeated for the remaining sense media：
ear, nose, tongue, body, and intellect.]

“In this way he remains focused internally on mental qualities in and
of themselves ... This is how a monk remains focused on mental qualities
in and of themselves with reference to the sixfold internal and external
sense media.

“And further, the monk remains focused on mental qualities in and of
themselves with reference to the seven factors for awakening. And how
does a monk remain focused on mental qualities in and of themselves with
reference to the seven factors for awakening? There is the case where, there
being mindfulness as a factor for awakening present within, he discerns,
‘Mindfulness as a factor for awakening is present within me.’ Or, there
being no mindfulness as a factor for awakening present within, he discerns,
‘Mindfulness as a factor for awakening is not present within me.’ He
discerns how there is the arising of unarisen mindfulness as a factor for
awakening. And he discerns how there is the culmination of the development
of mindfulness as a factor for awakening once it has arisen. [The same
formula is repeated for the remaining factors for awakening： analysis
of qualities, persistence, rapture, calm, concentration, and equanimity.]

“In this way he remains focused internally on mental qualities in and
of themselves ... This is how a monk remains focused on mental qualities
in and of themselves with reference to the seven factors for awakening.

“And further, the monk remains focused on mental qualities in and of
themselves with reference to the four noble truths. And how does a monk
remain focused on mental qualities in and of themselves with reference
to the four noble truths? There is the case where he discerns, as it has
come to be, that ‘This is stress ... This is the origination of
stress ... This is the cessation of stress ... This is the way leading to
the cessation of stress.’

“In this way he remains focused internally on mental qualities in and of
themselves, or externally on mental qualities in and of themselves, or both
internally and externally on mental qualities in and of themselves. Or he
remains focused on the phenomenon of origination with regard to mental
qualities, on the phenomenon of passing away with regard to mental
qualities, or on the phenomenon of origination and passing away with
regard to mental qualities. Or his mindfulness that ‘There are mental
qualities’ is maintained to the extent of knowledge and remembrance. And
he remains independent, unsustained by [not clinging to] anything in the
world. This is how a monk remains focused on mental qualities in and of
themselves with reference to the four noble truths.
