---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 46-49
  Source:
    Title: The Stormy Search for the Self
By:
  - Stanislav Grof
  - Christina Grof
---
Throughout history, people in intense spiritual crises were acknowledged by
many cultures as blessed; they were thought to be in direct communication
with the sacred realms and divine beings. Their societies supported them
through these crucial episodes, offering sanctuary and suspending the usual
demands. Respected members of their communities had been through their own
emergencies, could recognize and understand a similar process in others,
and, as a result, were able to honor the expression ofthe creative, mystical
impulse. The often colorful and dramatic experiences were nourished with the
trust that these individuals would eventually return to the community with
greater wisdom and an enhanced capacity to conduct themselves in the world,
to their own benefit as well as that of society.

With the advent of modern science and the industrial age, this tolerant
and even nurturing attitude changed drastically. The notion of acceptable
reality was narrowed to include only those aspects of existence that are
material, tangible, and measurable. Spirituality in any form was exiled from
the modern scientific worldview. Western cultures adopted a restricted and
rigid interpretation of what is “normal” in human experience and behavior
and rarely accepted those who sought to go beyond these limits.

Psychiatry found biological explanations for certain mental disorders in the
form of infections, tumors, chemical imbalances, and other afflictions of
the brain or body. It also discovered powerful ways of controlling symptoms
of various conditions for which the causes remained unknown, including
the manifestations of spiritual crises. As a result of these successes,
psychiatry became firmly established as a medical discipline, and the term
mental disease was extended to include many states that, strictly speaking,
were natural conditions that could not be linked to biological causes. The
process of spiritual emergence in general, along with its more dramatic
manifestations, came to be viewed as an illness, and those who demonstrated
signs of what had been previously thought of as inner transformation and
growth were in most cases now considered to be sick.

Consequently, many people who have emotional or psychosomatic symptoms are
automatically classified as having a medical problem, and their difficulties
are seen as diseases of unknown origin, although clinical and laboratory
tests do not offer any supportive evidence for such an approach. Most
nonordinary states of consciousness are considered pathological and are
treated with traditional psychiatric methods such as suppressive medication
and hospitalization. As a result of this bias, many people who are involved
in the natural healing process of spiritual emergence are automatically put
in the same category as those with true mental illness -- especially if their
experiences are causing a crisis in their lives or are creating difficulties
for their families.

This interpretation is further fueled by the fact that much of our culture
does not recognize the significance and value of the mystical domains within
human beings. The spiritual elements inherent in personal transformation
seem alien and threatening to those who are unfamiliar with them.

In the last couple of decades, however, this situation has been changing
rapidly. Spirituality has been reintroduced into the mainstream culture
through renewed interest in sacred systems such as those found in Eastern
religions. Western mystical literature, and Native American traditions.
Numerous people are experimenting with meditation and other forms of
spiritual practice; others are involved in self-exploration using various
new therapies. Through these methods, they are discovering new dimensions
and possibilities within themselves. At the same time, revolutionary
developments in many disciplines are rapidly closing the gap between science
and spirituality, and modern physicists and researchers in other fields are
moving toward a worldview similar to that described by the mystics.

Along with the renewed interest in mysticism, we are seeing another
phenomenon： growing numbers of people are having spiritual and paranormal
experiences and are willing to talk more openly about them. A survey by the
Gallup Organization showed that 43 percent oiithe people polled admitted
to having had unusual spiritual experiences, and 95 percent said that
they believed in God or a universal spirit. From our own observations, it
appears that coinciding with this expanded interest is a growing incidence
of difficulties related to the transformation process.

We became deeply aware of this apparent increase in spiritual emergencies
as we traveled around the world in the past decade, presenting workshops
and lectures in which we talked about our personal experiences and our
alternative understanding of some states that have automatically been labeled
as psychotic, We were amazed to find many people who resonated with various
elements of our stories. Some had been through transformative experiences
and felt more fulfilled as a result. Many others had had similar experiences
but told us tragic stories of families and professionals who misunderstood
them, of hospital commitments, unnecessary tranquilizers, and stigmatizing
psychiatric labels. Often, a process that had originally begun as healing
and transformative had been interrupted and even complicated by psychiatric
intervention,

We have also met creative, compassionate, and innovative mental-health
professionals- psychiatrists, psychologists, and others -- who are looking for
or are already providing alternatives for their patients. Many have expressed
their frustration at not being able to pursue their ideas and approaches
within their hospitals or clinics, largely due to their organizations’
rigid adherence to the medical model, traditional administrative policy,
and bureaucratic restrictions. They have told us of their professional
loneliness and their desire to connect with like-minded people in their field.

As more and more people face spiritual emergencies, a growing number are
becoming dissatisfied with the application of traditional psychiatric treatment
during such events, lust as in recent years potential parents have actively
pressured medical professionals to return to a sense of the time-honored
reverence for birth and its dynamics, people involved in a transformational
crisis are beginning to demand that professionals recognize their difficulties
for what they are： challenging stages in a potentially life-changing process.
