---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 13 - ䷌ - T'ung Jen
    Line: 2
    Page: 95-97
By: Anatople France
---
“The Jews,” replied Lamia, “are profoundly attached to their ancient
customs. They suspected you, unreasonably I admit, of a desire to abolish
their laws and change their usages. Do not resent it, Pontius, if I say
that you did not always act in such a way as to disperse their unfortunate
illusion. It gratified you, despite your habitual self-restraint, to
play upon their fears, and more than once have I seen you betray in their
presence the contempt with which their beliefs and religious ceremonies
inspired you. You irritated them particularly by giving instructions for
the sacerdotal garments and ornaments of their high priest to be kept
in ward by your legionnaires in the Antonine tower. One must admit that
though they have never risen like us to an appreciation of things divine,
the Jews celebrate rites which their very antiquity renders venerable.”

Pontius Pilate shrugged his shoulders.

“They have very little exact knowledge of the nature of the gods,”
he said. “They worship Jupiter, yet they abstain from naming him or
erecting a statue of him. They do not even adore him under the semblance
of a rude stone, as certain of the Asiatic peoples are wont to do. They
know nothing of Apollo, of Neptune, of Mars, nor of Pluto, nor of any
goddess. At the same time, I am convinced that in the days gone by they
worshipped Venus. For even to this day their women bring doves to the altar
as victims; and you know as well as I that the dealers who trade beneath
the arcades of their temple supply those birds in couples for sacrifice. I
have even been told that on one occasion some madman proceeded to overturn
the stalls bearing their offerings, and their owners with them. The priests
raised an outcry about it, and looked on it as a case of sacrilege. I am
of the opinion that their custom of sacrificing turtle-doves was instituted
in honor of Venus. Why are you laughing, Lamia?”

“I was laughing,” said Lamia, “at an amusing idea which, I hardly
know how, just occurred to me. I was thinking that perchance some day the
Jupiter of the Jews might come to Rome and vent his fury upon you. Why
should he not? Asia and Africa have already enriched us with a considerable
number of gods. We have seen temples in honor of Isis and the dog-faced
Anubis erected in Rome. In the public square, and even on the race-courses,
you may run across the Bona Dea of the Syrians mounted on an ass. And did
you never hear how, in the reign of Tiberius, a young patrician passed
himself off as the horned Jupiter of the Egyptians, Jupiter Ammon, and
in this disguise procured the favors of an illustrious lady who was too
virtuous to deny anything to a god? Beware, Pontius, lest the invisible
Jupiter of the Jews disembark some day on the quay at Ostia!"
