---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LXXI
    Page: 115
Title: That some may not come to feel the perfection of this work but
  in time of ravishing, and some may have it when they will, in the
  common state of man’s soul
---
Some think this matter so hard and so fearful, that they say it may not be
come to without much strong travail coming before, nor conceived but seldom,
and that but in the time of ravishing. And to these men will I answer as
feebly as I can, and say, that it is all at the ordinance and the disposition
of God, after their ableness in soul that this grace of contemplation and
of ghostly working is given to.

For some there be that without much and long ghostly exercise may not come
thereto, and yet it shall be but full seldom, and in special calling of our
Lord that they shall feel the perfection of this work： the which calling
is called ravishing. And some there be that be so subtle in grace and in
spirit, and so homely with God in this grace of contemplation, that they may
have it when they will in the common state of man’s soul： as it is in
sitting, going, standing, or kneeling. And yet in this time they have full
deliberation of all their wits bodily or ghostly, and may use them if they
desire： not without some letting (but without great letting). Ensample
of the first we have by Moses, and of this other by Aaron the priest of the
Temple： for why, this grace of contemplation is figured by the Ark of the
Testament in the old law, and the workers in this grace be figured by them
that most meddled them about this Ark, as the story will witness. And well
is this grace and this work likened unto that Ark. For right as in that Ark
were contained all the jewels and the relics of the Temple, right so in this
little love put upon this cloud be contained all the virtues of man’s soul,
the which is the ghostly Temple of God.

Moses ere he might come to see this Ark and for to wit how it should be made,
with great long travail he clomb up to the top of the mountain, and dwelled
there, and wrought in a cloud six days： abiding unto the seventh day that our
Lord would vouchsafe for to shew unto him the manner of this Ark-making. By
Moses’s long travail and his late shewing, be understood those that may
not come to the perfection of this ghostly work without long travail coming
before： and yet but full seldom, and when God will vouchsafe to shew it.

But that that Moses might not come to see but seldom, and that not without
great long travail, Aaron had in his power because of his office, for to see
it in the Temple within the Veil as oft as him liked for to enter. And by
this Aaron is understood all those the which I spake of above, the which by
their ghostly cunning, by help of grace, may assign unto them the perfection
of this work as them liketh.
