---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 313-315
  Source:
    Title: Living in Truth
By: Vaclav Havel
Title: Thriller
---
To this day, we cannot understand how a great, civilized nation -- or
at least a considerable part of lit -- could, in the twentieth century,
succumb to its fascination for a single, ridiculous, complex-ridden, petit
bourgieos; could fall for his pseudo-scientific theories and in their
name exterminate nations, conquer continents, and commit unbelievable
cruelties. Positivistic science, Marxism included, offers a variety of
scientific explanations for this mysterious phenomenon, but instead of
eliminating the mystery, they tend rather to deepen it. For the cold,
“objective” reason that speaks to us from these explanations in fact
only underlines the disproportion between itself -- a power that claims
to be the decisive one in this civilization -- and the mass insanity that
has nothing in common with any form of rationality.

Yes, when traditional myth was laid to rest, a kind of “order” in the
dark region ofour being was buried along with it. And what modern reason has
attempted to substitute for this order, has consistently proved erroneous,
false, and disastrous, because it is always in some way deceitful,
artificial, rootless, lacking in both ontology and morality. It may even
border on the ludicrous, like the cult of the “Supreme Being” during
the French Revolution, the collectivist folklore of totalitarian systems,
or their “realist,” selfcelebrating art. It seems to me that with
the burial ofmyth, the barn in which the mysterious animals of the human
unconscious were housed over thousands of years has been abandoned and the
animals turned loose -- or, the tragically mistaken assumption that they
were phantoms -- and that now they are devastating the countryside. They
devastate it, and at the same time they make themselves at home where we
least expect them to -- in the secretariats of modern political parties,
for example. These sanctuaries of modern reason lend them their tools and
their authority so that ultimately the plunder is sanctioned by the most
scientific of world views.

Generally, people do not begin to grasp the horror of their situation
until too late： that is, until they realize that thousands of
their fellow humans have been murdered for reasons that are utterly
irrational. Irrationality, hiding behind sober reason and a belief that
the inexorable march of history demands the sacrifice of millions to
assure a happy future for billions, seems essentially more irrational and
dangerous than the kind ofirrationality that, in and through myth, admits
to its own existence, comes to terms with the “positive powers” and,
at most, sacrifices animals. The demons simply do what they want while
the gods take diffident refuge in the final asylum to which they have
been driven, called “human conscience.” And so at last bloodlust,
disguised as the most scientific of the world’s views (which teaches,
by the way, that conscience must submit to historical necessity) throws
a twentieth-century John of Nepomuk into the Vistula. And the nation
immediately canonizes its martyr in spirit.

In the events which chance tossed together in a single newscast,
and juxtaposed with Agrippa’s Occult Philosophy, I begin to see a
sophisticated collage that takes on the dimensions of‘a symbol, an
emblem, a code. I do not know what message is hidden in that unintentional
artefact, which might be called “Thriller,” after Michael Jackson’s
famous song. I only feel that chance -- that great poet -- is stammering
an indistinct message about the desperate state of the modern world.

First, Marxist demonologists in the Polish papers label Popieluszko
a practitioner of black magic who, with the assistance of the Devil,
serves the black mass of anti-communism in the church of St. Stanislav
Kostka,‘ then, other scientific Marxists waylay him at night, beat
him to death and throw him into the Vistula; and finally, still other
“scientists” on one-sixth of the earth's surface claim that the
Devil in disguise -- the CIA, in other words -- is behind it. It is all
pure medieval history. Except that the actors are scientists, people
shielded by science, possessing an allegedly scientific world View. Of
course that makes the whole thing so much more powerful. The demons have
been turned loose and go about, grotesquely pretending to be honourable
twentieth-century men who do not believe in evil spirits. The Sikhs do
not even need to masquerade as men of science. Confronting this modern
world with modern machine guns in their hands, they believe themselves
to be instruments of providence： after all, they are merely meting out
punishment in accordance with the ancient prophecy about the desecrator
of their Golden Temple. The Hindus then turn around and murder Sikhs,
burning them alive, as though all Sikhs, to the last man, had taken part
in Mrs. Gandhi’s murder. How can this happen in the century of‘science
and reason? How can science and reason explain it? How does it relate
to colonizing the Moon and making ready an expedition to Mars? How does
it relate to an age capable of transplanting the heart of a baboon into
a person? Could we be getting ready to go to Mars in the secret hope
ofleaving our demons behind on the earth and so disposing ofthem? And
who, in fact, has a baboon heart： that little girl in California-or
the Marxist government of Ethiopia, building its mausoleums in a time of
famine; or the Polish police; or the Sikhs in the personal bodyguard of
the Indian prime minister who died -- thanks to their belief in ancient
prophecies -- like an antique emperor at the hands of his own servants?

It seems to me that man has what we call a human heart, but that he also
has something of the baboon within him. The modern age treats the heart
as a pump and denies the presence of the baboon within us. And so again
and again, this officially non-existent baboon, unobserved, goes on the
rampage, either as the personal bodyguard of a politician, or wearing
the uniform of the most scientific police force in the world.

Modern man, that methodical civil servant in the great bureaucracy of the
world, mildly frustrated by the collapse of his “scientific” world
view, finally switches on his video recorder to watch Michael Jackson
playing a vampire in “Thriller,” the best-selling video cassette
in the history of the world, then goes into the kitchen to remove from
a thermos flask -- behind the backs of all animal welfare societies--
the still warm heart ofa hoopoe. And he swallows it, hoping to have the
gift of prophecy conferred upon him.
