---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 571-572
Tags:
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=Materia Prima and Human Perfection
By: Michael Sendivogius
Commentary: |
  This eulogy of materia prima (and the primordial state identified with
  it) can be elucidated as follows： Nature is speaking of her one son,
  Mercury, here representing the principial. hence first or ‘synthetic-
  nature from which the seven (planetary or metallic) qualities are
  derived, the one substance before its determination into all (outward)
  things. This is the ‘quintessence" out of which proceed the fo u r
  elements, a spirit, being formless, yet body, since still pertaining
  to the manifested domain. A man, being active in relation to the
  individual state, yet woman in virtue of the substantial, passive part
  it (qua prakriti) plays in relation to essence (purusha)： a boy, as
  regards the primordial innocence (bâlya). but man in the central role
  of conqueror and King of the human state. The winged beast (whether
  lion, dragon, or griffin) symbolizes the ‘fixed volatile-, or union of
  sulphur and mercury. Its undifferentiated unity is a poison seen from
  the viewpoint of manifestation, and kills all things in their illusory
  separateness, while in reality it is life which cures the leprosy of
  egocentric illusion corrupting the soul’s immortal essence. The King's
  throne is the center of the soul, occupied by another, the indwelling
  Deity. He flees from (i.e. is not identified with) the fire of the
  chaotic, wrathful, or obscure pole, which as inverse reflection, is
  taken from him. He is water in the sense of mùla-prakriti. being the
  undifferentiated potentiality of all forms prior to manifestation, and
  thus does not wet the hands; earth that is sown, i.e. seed and
  productive substance (hiranyagarbha, jiva-ghana) of formal
  possibilities： air when envisaged as Spirit (breath, rûh). and lives
  (i.e. manifests) by water, as in Genesis. I. 2： ‘And the Spirit of
  God moved upon the face of the waters'.
---
Nature： Know that I have only one such son; he is one of seven, and
the first among them; and though he is now all things, he was at first
only one. In him are the four elements, yet he is not an element. He
is a spirit, yet he has a body： a man. yet he performs a woman's
part： a boy. yet he bears a man's weapons： a beast, and yet-he has
the wings of a bird. He is poison, yet he cures leprosy： life, yet he
kills all things： a King, but another occupies his throne： he flees
from the fire, yet fire is taken from him： he is water, but does not
wet the hands： he is earth, and yet he is sown： he is air. and lives
by water.
