---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 100-102
  Source:
    Title: Memories, Dreams, Reflections
By: C. G. Jung
Title: The Tower
---
I was in Bollingen just as the first tower was being finished. This was
the winter of 1923-24. As far as I can recall, there was no snow on the
ground; perhaps it was early spring. I had been alone perhaps for a week,
perhaps longer. An indescribable stillness prevailed.

One evening -- I can still remember it precisely -- I was sitting by
the fireplace and had put a big kettle on the fire to make hot water for
washing up. The water began to boil and the kettle to sing. It sounded like
many voices, or stringed instruments, or even like a whole orchestra. It
was just like polyphonic music, which in reality I cannot abide, though
in this case it seemed to me peculiarly interesting. It was as though
there were one orchestra inside the Tower and another one outside. Now
one dominated, now the other, as though they were responding to each other.

I sat and listened, fascinated. For far more than an hour I listened to
the concert, to this natural melody. It was soft music, containing, as
well, all the discords of nature. And that was right, for nature is not
only harmonious; she is also dreadfully contradictory and chaotic. The
music was that way too： an outpouring of sounds, having the quality of
water and of wind -- so strange that it is simply impossible to describe it.

On another such still night when I was alone in Bollingen (it was in
the late winter or early spring of 1924) I awoke to the sound of soft
footsteps going around the Tower. Distant music sounded, coming closer
and closer, and then I heard voices laughing and talking. I thought,
“Who can be prowling around? What is this all about? There is only the
little footpath along the lake, and scarcely anybody ever walks on it!”
While I was thinking these things I became wide awake, and went to the
window. I opened the shutters -- all was still. There was no one in sight,
nothing to be heard -- no wind -- nothing -- nothing at all.

“This is really strange,” I thought. I was certain that the footsteps,
the laughter and talk, had been real. But apparently I had only been
dreaming. I returned to bed and mulled over the way we can deceive ourselves
after all, and what might have been the cause of such a strange dream. In
the midst of this, I fell asleep again-and at once the same dream began：
once more I heard footsteps, talk, laughter, music. At the same time I
had a visual image of several hundred dark-clad figures, possibly peasant
boys in their Sunday clothes, who had come down from the mountains and
were pouring in around the Tower, on both sides, with a great deal ofloud
trampling, laughing, singing, and playing of accordions. Irritably, I
thought, “This is really the limit.l I thought it was a dream and now
it turns out to be reality!” At this point, I woke up. Once again I
jumped up, opened the window and shutters, and found everything just the
same as before： a deathly still moonlit night. Then I thought： “Why,
this is simply a case of haunting!”

Naturally I asked myself what it meant when a dream was so insistent on
its reality and at the same time on my being awake. Usually we experience
that only when we see a ghost. Being awake means perceiving reality. The
dream therefore represented a situation equivalent to reality, in which
it created a kind of wakened state. In this sort of dream, as opposed
to ordinary dreams, the unconscious seems bent on conveying a powerful
impression of reality to the dreamer, an impression which is emphasized
by repetition. The sources of such realities are known to be physical
sensations on the one hand, and archetypal figures on the other.

That night everything was so completely real, or at least seemed to be
so, that I could scarcely sort out the two realities. Nor could I make
anything of the dream itself. What was the meaning of these music-making
peasant boys passing by in a long procession? It seemed to me they had
come out of curiosity, in order to look at the Tower.

Never again did I experience or dream anything similar, and I cannot recall
ever having heard ofa parallel to it. It was only much later that I found
an explanation. This was when I came across the seventeenth-century Lucerne
chronicle by Rennward Cysat. He tells the following story： On a high
pasture of Mount Pilatus, which is particularly notorious for spooks --
it is said that Wotan to this day practices his magic arts there -- Cysat,
while climbing the mountain, was disturbed one night by a procession of
men who poured past his hut on both sides, playing music and singing --
precisely what I had experienced at the Tower.

The next morning Cysat asked the herdsman with whom he had spent that night
what could have been the meaning of it. The man had a ready explanation：
those must be the departed folk -- salig Lut, in Swiss dialect; the phrase
also means blessed folk -- namely, Wotan’s army of departed souls. These,
he said, were in the habit of walking abroad and showing themselves.

It may be suggested that this is a phenomenon of solitude, the outward
emptiness and silence being compensated by the image of a crowd of
people. This would put it in the same class with the hallucinations of
hermits, which are likewise compensatory. But do we know what realities
such stories may be founded on? It is also possible that I had been so
sensitized by the solitude that I was able to perceive the procession of
“departed folk” who passed by.

The explanation of this experience as a psychic compensation never entirely
satisfied me, and to say that it was a hallucination seemed to me to beg
the question. I felt obliged to consider the possibility of its reality,
especially in view of the seventeenth-century account which had come my way.

It would seem most likely to have been a synchronistic phenomenon. Such
phenomena demonstrate that premonitions or visions very often have
some correspondence in external reality. There actually existed, as I
discovered, a real parallel to my experience. In the Middle Ages just
such gatherings of young men took place. These were the Rez’rla'ufer
(mercenaries) who usually assembled in spring, marched from Central
Switzerland to Locarno, met at the Casa di Ferro in Minusio and then
marched on together to Milan. In Italy they served as soldiers, fighting
for foreign princes. My vision, therefore, might have been one of these
gatherings which took place regularly each spring when the young men,
with singing and jollity, bade farewell to their native land.
