---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Loss, Loneliness, and Grief
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 354-355
  Source:
    Title: Strength to Love
By: Martin Luther King, Jr.
---
At times we may feel that we do not need God, but on the day when the storms
of disappointment rage, the winds of disaster blow, and the tidal waves of
grief beat against our lives, if we do not have a deep and patient laith our
emotional lives will be ripped to shreds. There is so much frustration in
the world because we have relied on gods rather than God. We have genuflected
before the god of science only to find that it has given us the atomic bomb,
producing te‘ars and anxieties that science can never mitigate. We have
worshipped the god of pleasure only to discover that thrills play out and
sensations are short-lived. We have bowed before the god ofmoney only to
learn that there are such things as love and friendship that money cannot
buy and that in a world of possible depressions, stock market crashes, and
bad business investments, money is a rather uncertain deity. These transitory
gods are not able to save us or bring happiness to the human heart.

Only God is able. It is faith in him that we must rediscover. With this
faith we can transform bleak and desolate valleys into sunlit paths
ofjoy and bring new light into the dark caverns of pessimism. Is someone
here moving toward the twilight oflife and fearful of that which we
call death? Why be afraid? God is able. Is someone here on the brink of
despair because of the death ofa loved one, the breaking ofa marriage,
or the waywardness ofa child? Why despair? God is able to give you the
power to endure that which cannot be changed. Is someone here anxious
because of bad health? Why be anxious? Come what may, God is able.

As I come to the conclusion of my message, I would wish you to permit a
personal experience. The first twenty‘four years of my life were years
packed with fulfillment. I had no basic problems or burdens. Because
ofconcerned and loving parents who provided for my every need, I sallied
through high school, college, theological school, and graduate school
without interruption. It was not until I became a part ofthe leadership
ofthe Montgomery bus protest that I was actually confronted with the trials
of~ life. Almost immediately after the protest had been undertaken, we began
to receive threatening telephone calls and letters in our home. Sporadic
in the beginning, they increased day after day. At first I took them in
my stride, feeling that they were the work of a few hotheads who would
become discouraged alter they discovered that we would not fight back. But
as the weeks passed. I realized that many ofthe threats were in earnest. I
felt myselftailtering and growing in fear.

After a particularly strenuous day, I settled in bed at a late hour. My
wife had already fallen asleep and I was about to doze off" when the
tele phone rang. An angry voice said, “Listen, nigger, We‘ve taken
all We want from you. Before next week you'll be sorry you ever came to
Montgomery." 1 hung up, but I could not sleep. It seemed that all of my
fears had come down on me at once. I had reached the saturation point.

I got out of bed and began to walk the floor. Finally, I went to the kitchen
and heated a pot of coffee. I was ready to give up. I tried to think of
a way to move out of the picture without appearing to be a coward. In
this state ofexhaustion, when my courage had almost gone, I determined
to take my problem to God. My head in my hands, I bowed over the kitchen
table and prayed aloud. The words I spoke to God that midnight are still
vivid in my memory. “I am here taking a stand for what I believe is
right. But now I am afraid. The people are looking to me for leadership,
and ifI stand before them without strength and courage, they too will
falter. I am at the end ofmy powers. I have nothing left. I’ve come to
the point where I can't face it alone."

At that moment I experienced the presence ofthe Divine as I had never before
experienced him. It seemed as though I could hear the quiet assurance of an
inner voice, saying, “Stand up for righteousness, stand up for truth. God
will be at your side forever.” Almost at once my fears began to pass
from me. My uncertainty disappeared. I was ready to face anything. The
outer situation remained the same, but God had given me inner calm.

Three nights later, our home was bombed. Strangely enough, I accepted
the word of the bombing calmly. My experience with God had given me a new
strength and trust. I knew now that God is able to give us the interior
resources to face the storms and problems oflife.

Let this affirmation be our ringing cry. It will give us courage to face
the uncertainties of the future. It will give our tired feet new strength
as we continue our forward stride toward the city of freedom. When our days
become dreary with low-hovering clouds and our nights become darker than a
thousand midnights, let us remember that there is a great benign Power in
the universe whose name is God, and he is able to make a way out of no way,
and transform dark yesterdays into bright tomorrows. This is our hope for
becoming better men. This is our mandate for seeking to make a better world.
