---
Tags:
  - Revelation=wakening the Great Mother
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 222-223
  Source:
    Title: The Arrchetypes and the Collective Unconscious
By: C. G. Jung
Title: The Mother Archetype
---
Like any other archetype, the mother archetype appears under an almost
infinite variety of aspects. I mention here only some of the more
characteristic. First in importance are the personal mother and grandmother,
stepmother and mother-in-law; then any woman with whom a relationship
exists -- for example, a nurse or governess or perhaps a remote
ancestress. Then there are what might be termed mothers in a figurative
sense. To this category belongs the goddess, and especially the Mother
of God, the Virgin, and Sophia. Mythology offers many variations of the
mother archetype, as for instance the mother who reappears as the maiden
in the myth of Demeter and Kore; or the mother who is also the beloved,
as in the Cybele-Attis myth. Other symbols of the mother in a figurative
sense appear in things representing the goal of our longing for redemption,
such as Paradise, the Kingdom of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem. Many things
arousing devotion or feelings of awe, as for instance the Church, university,
city or country, heaven, earth, the woods, the sea or any still waters,
matter even, the underworld and the moon, can be mother-symbols. The
archetype is often associated with things and places standing for fertility
and fruitfulness： the cornucopia, a ploughed field, a garden. It can be
attached to a rock, a cave, a tree, a spring, a deep well, or to various
vessels such as the baptismal font, or to vessel-shaped flowers like the
rose or the lotus. Because of the protection it implies, the magic circle or
mandala can be a form of mother archetype. Hollow objects such as ovens and
cooking vessels are associated with the mother archetype, and, of course,
the uterus, yoni, and anything of a like shape. Added to this list there
are many animals, such as the cow, hare, and helpful animals in general.

All these symbols can have a positive, favourable meaning or a negative,
evil meaning. An ambivalent aspect is seen in the goddesses of fate
(Moira. Graeae, Norris). Evil symbols are the witch, the dragon (or any
devouring and entwining animal, such as a large fish or a serpent), the
grave, the sarcophagus, deep water, death, nightmares, and bogies (Empusa,
Lilith, etc.). This list is not, of course, complete; it presents only
the most important features of the mother archetype.

The qualities associated with it are maternal solicitude and sympathy; the
magic authority of the female; the wisdom and spiritual exaltation that
transcend reason; any helpful instinct or impulse; all that is benign,
all that cherishes and sustains, that fosters growth and fertility. The
place of magic transformation and rebirth, together with the underworld and
its inhabi' tants, are presided over by the mother. On the negative side
the mother archetype may connote anything secret, hidden, dark; the abyss,
the world of the dead, anything that devours, seduces, and poisons, that is
terrifying and inescapable like fate. All these attributes of the mother
archetype have been fully described and documented in my book Symbols of
Transformation. There I formulated the ambivalence of these attitudes as
“the loving and the terrible mother.” Perhaps the historical example
of the dual nature of the mother most familiar to us is the Virgin Mary,
who is not only the Lord’s mother, but also, according to the medieval
allegories, his cross. In India, “the loving and terrible mother” is the
paradoxical Kali. Sankhya philosophy has elaborated the mother archetype
into the conCept ofpmkrtz' (matter) and assigned to it the three gunas or
fundamental attributes： sattI/a, raja's, tamas： goodness, passion,
and darkness. These are three essential aspects of the mother： her
cherishing and nourishing goodness, her orgiastic emotionality, and her
Stygian depths. The special feature of the philosophical myth, which shows
Prakrti dancing before Purusha in order to remind him of “discriminating
knowledge,” does not belong to the mother archetype but to the archetype
of the anima, which in a man’s psychology invariably appears, at first,
mingled with the mother-image.
