---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 449-450
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Malevolence
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=Sanâtana Dharma
By: Sri Chandrasekhara Bhâratî Swâmigal
References:
  - Body: The new revelation manifests outside and above the Churches. Its
      teaching is addressed to all races on earth. Everywhere the spirits
      proclaim the principles on which it is based. Over all regions of the
      globe passes the great voice which recalls man to the thought of God
      and the future life.
    Source: Léon Denis： Christianisme et Spiritisme, pp.
      277-278; in Guénon ： L 'Erreur spirite, 2nd edit., Paris, 1952, pp.
      365- 366
  - Body: Today, all parts of the world have been explored; humanity, which
      now knows itself better, aspires to a real peace. But because of the
      very multiplicity of ... religions, men do not always live in harmony
      among each other. That is why I have decided to reunite all these
      religions into a single one, Caodaism. to restore them to primordial
      unity
    Source: Cao-Dai. in a spirit message given on January 13. 1927：
      Maurice Colinon： Faux Prophètes et Sectes d ’aujourd’hui, Paris.
      Pion. 1953. p. 90
  - Body: We cannot stop in our progress with organizations and systems
      either orthodox or metaphysical, for they are sectional, sectarian,
      and teach a doctrine that is more or less involved with the idea
      of separations. They are only steps in the process of man’s discovery
      of himself. We cannot stop at any point without becoming orthodox.
      That prevents further progress until we break away
    Source: Baird T. Spalding, op. cit., p. 97
  - Body: Universal persecution will have reforged Humanity, which, on a new
      religious footing, will gradually return to the Gospel of Love
    Source: Georges Barbarin： Qui sera le Mailre du Monde . .?, Paris, 1949,
      p. 167
  - Body: A great ecclesiastical system, steeped in iniquity and crime, is
      directed by a single man; and this man claims that his role is to be
      the vicar of Christ on earth, and that he has a power equal to
      Jehovah's This system is spoken of in the Scriptures as the great
      whore.
    Source: Judge Rutherford： The Truth Will M ake You Free, p. 312：
      Colinon, op. cit., p. 188
  - Body: The apparitions of the Virgin Mary and other saints in the Roman
      Catholic religion are nothing but spiritualism and demonism in
      disguise
    Source: Alexander Freytag： Le Bien-être sur la Terre, p. 44; id.,
      p. 167
Commentary: Thus all ecclesiastical forms will be broken, all hierarchies
  scattered. Canons and dogmas will be thrown down with the discarded
  residues of theologies and interpretations. New apostles will preach
  the primitive Gospel in a whisper. The faithful will be gathered under
  new symbols which will resemble the ancient symbols. ... A young elect will
  propagate the divine fire across the devastated earth, and bare
  footed, heads shaven, will preach hope and charity. ...
---
Many people of these modern days ... call every activity by the name
of Dharma and begin to proclaim that there need be no distinction of
castes, that all should behave in the same manner and that the good of
the country depends upon such ‘equality’. There are many others who
repose confidence in the teachers of this school, embark on ways
directly prohibited by the Sâstras and make determined efforts to
create confusion of castes and bring about the ascendance of Adharma
in the world. The Lord has no doubt stated that He will incarnate
whenever there is a decline in Dharma and a rise in Adharma. Evidently
the promulgators of such teachings are helping in a way but quite
unconsciously the early advent of the Lord once again in our midst.
