---
Source:
  By: Xuedou Zhongxian
  ID: 5a0c4642-20c8-46c0-8073-7434833fa6b4
  Locus:
    Case: 91
  Title: Odes to a Classic Hundred Standards
  Translator: Gregory Wonderwheel
Title: Yanguan's Rhinoceros
---
\[Yuanwu's] Appended pointer says：

Leap over emotions; separate from views; leave bonds;
and loosen the stuck. Indeed, rise up facing the vehicle of the supreme
lineage. Aid and abet the treasury of the correct Dharma eye. Also in
the ten directions you must uniformly respond with the exquisiteness of
the eight facets. In this way you directly arrive at the cropland.
Just say, in giving back is there the foundation of the same
attainment, the same testimony, the same death and the same birth? A
test is raised to examine it：

Raised：

Yanguan one day called the attendant, "Give me the
rhinoceros fan."

The attendant said, "The fan is broken!"

Guan said, "Since the fan is broken, give back to me the
rhinoceros calf."

The attendant had no reply.

Touzi said, "I don't refuse to produce it; I'm fearful
the horn on the head is incomplete."

Xuedou picked it up and said, "I want the incomplete
horn on the head."

Shishuang said. "If it is returned to the venerable,
then there is nothing!"

Xuedou picked it up and said, "The rhinoceros calf is
still present."

Zifu drew the appearance of a single circle and in the
center drew the single character for "ox".

Xuedou picked it up and said, "In coming and going, what
are you going to produce?"

Baofu said, "The venerable's age is respected; better to
ask a different person."

Xuedou picked it up and said, "Pitiable, to toil yet be
without merit."

Xuedou's ode in one thread says：

Beating.

The rhinoceros fan has been in use for many ages.

The question manifests from the beginning and in general one does not
know.

The unrestricted clear wind and the horn on the head,

To the same end, when they leave, the clouds and rain are difficult to
pursue.

Xuedou again said, "If you want the clear wind to return
and the horn on the head re-grow, then I ask each of you zen guests to
let down a single turning word on the stated question, 'Since the fan
is broken. give back to me the rhinoceros calf.'"

At that time there was a monk who came forth and said,
"Great multitude, leave the meeting hall."

Xuedou called out and said, "I cast the hook fishing for
Kun (a giant fish of legend), and in fishing got this single frog." He
then descended from the seat.
