---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 201-205
  Source:
    Title: The Modern Century
By: Northrop Frye
---
In every age there is a structure of ideas, images, beliefs, assumptions,
anxieties, and hopes which express the view of man’s situation and
destiny generally held at that time. I call this structure a mythology,
and its units myths. A myth, in this sense, is an expression of man’s
concern about himself, about his place in the scheme of things, about his
relation to society and God, about the ultimate origin and ultimate fate,
either of himself or of the human species generally. A mythology is thus
a product of human concern, of our involvement with ourselves, and it
always looks at the world from a mancentred point of view. The early and
primitive myths were stories, mainly stories about gods, and their units
were physical images. In more highly structured societies they develop in
two different but related directions. In the first place, they develop into
literature as we know it, first into foil'lxtales and legends of heroes,
thence into the conventional plots of fiction and metaphors of poetry. In
the second place, they become conceptualized, and become the informing
principles of historical and philosophical thought, as the myth of fall
becomes the informing idea of Gibbon's history of Rome, or the myth of
the sleeping beauty Rousseau’s buried society of nature and reason. My
first lecture dealt primarily with mythology in this sense, particularly
with the so-called existential myths.

It seems to me that there have been two primary mythological constructions
in Western culture. One was the vast synthesis that institutional
Christianity made ofits Biblical and Aristotelian sources. This myth is
at its clearest in the Middle Ages, but it persisted for centuries later,
and much of its structure, though greatly weakened by the advance of
science, was still standing in the eighteenth century itself. The other
is the modern mythology that began when the modern world did, in the
later eighteenth century, but reached its more specifically modern shape
a century later, and a century before now.

The older mythology was one that stressed two things in particular,
the subject-object relation and the use of reason. Man was a subject
confronting a nature set over against him. Both man and nature were
creatures of God, and were united by that fact. There were no gods in
nature： if man looked into the powers ofnature to find such gods they
would soon turn into devils. What he should look at nature for is the
evidence of purpose and design which it shows as a complementary creation
of God, and the reason can grasp this sense ofdesign. The rational approach
to nature was thus superior to the empirical and experimental approach to
it, and the sciences that were most deductive and closest to mathematics
were those that were first developed. ()fall sciences, astronomy is the
most dependent on the subject-object relationship, and in the Middle Ages
particularly, astronomy was the science par excellence, the one science that
a learned medieval poet, such as Dante or Chaucer, would be assumed to know.

In the pre-modern myth man‘s ultimate origin was of God, and his chief
end was to draw closer to God. Even more important, the social discipline
which raised him above the rest of creation was a divine ordinance. Law
was of God; the forms of human civilization, the city and the garden,
were imitations of divine models, for God planted the garden of Eden
and had established his city before man was created; the ultimate human
community' was not in this world, but in a heaven closer to the divine
presence. Philosophers recognized that the ordinary categories of the mind,
such as our perception ot‘time and space, might not be adequate at a
purely spiritual level. It was possible, for example, that a spiritual body,
such as an angel, (lid not occupy space or travel in space at all. The
unfortunate wretch who attempted to put this question into a lively and
memorable form by asking how many angels could stand on the point ofa
pin has become a byword lo‘r pedantic stupidity, a terrible warning to
all instructors who try to make a technical subject interesting. But as
far as popular beliel‘and poetic imagery were concerned, the spiritual
world was thought of as essentially another objective environment, to
be described in symbols -- city, temple, garden, streets -- derived from
human life, though the myth taught that human life had been derived from
them. This mythology, relating as it did both man and nature to God, was a
total one, so complete and far-reaching that an alternative world-picture
was practically unthinkable. This is the real significance of Voltaire's
familiar epigram, that if God did not exist it would be necessary to invent
him, which was, in his day, a much more serious remark than it sounds. One
could, theoretically, be an atheist; but even an atheist would find God
blocking his way on all sides： he would meet the hypothesis of God in
history, in philosophy, in psychology, in astronomy. As for morality,
its standards were so completely assimilated to religious sanctions that
even a century ago it was impossible for many people to believe that
non-religious man could have any moral integrity at all.

In the eighteenth century there began to grow, slowly but irresistibly,
the conviction that man had created his own civilization. This meant not
merely that he was responsible for it -- he had always been that -- but
that its forms of city and garden and design, oflaw and social discipline
and education, even, ultimately, of morals and religion, were of human
origin and human creation. This new feeling crystallized around Rousseau
in the eighteenth century, and the assumptions underlying the American and
French revolutions were relatively new assumptions. Liberty was no longer,
as it had been for Milton, something that God gives and that man resists：
it was something that most men want and that those who have a stake in
slavery invoke their gods to prevent them from getting. Law was no longer,
as it had been for Hooker, the reflection of divine order in human life,
but in large part the reflection of class privilege in property rights. Art
and culture were no longer, as they had been for the age of Shakespeare,
the ornaments of social discipline： they took on a prophetic importance
as portraying the forms of civilization that man had created. The Romantic
movement brought in the conception ofthe “serious” artist, setting his
face against society to follow his art, from which the modern antagonism
of the artist to society. ... has descended.

A major principle of the older mythology was the correspondence of human
reason with the design and purpose in nature which it perceives. This
correspondence was still accepted even after God had dwindled into a deistic
first cause, a necessary hypothesis and nothing more. The modern movement,
properly speaking, began when Darwin finally shattered the old teleological
conception of nature as reflecting an intelligent purpose. From then on
design in nature has been increasingly interpreted by science as a product
ofa self-serving nature. The older view ofdesign survives vestigially,
as when religion tells us that some acts are “contrary to nature.”
But contemporary science, which is professionally concerned with nature,
does not see in the ancient mother-goddess the Wisdom which was the bride
ofa superhuman creator. What it sees rather is a confused old beldame who
has got where she has through a remarkable obstinacy in adhering to trial
and error -- mostly error -- procedures. The rational design that nature
reflects is in the human mind only. An example of the kind of thinking
that Darwin has made impossible for the modern mind is： “Ifthe Lord
had intended us to fly, he’d have given us wings." The conception of
natural functions as related to a personal and creative intention is no
longer in our purview.

Modern mythology, at least with us, is naturally not as well unified as
the earlier one, but it does possess some unity none the less. It reaches
us on two main levels. There is a social mythology, which we learn through
conversation and the contacts of family, teachers, and neighbours, which
is reinforced by the mass media, newspapers, television, and movies,
and which is based fundamentally on cliche’ and stock response. In
the United States, elementary education, at least before the Sputnik
revolution of 1957, consisted very largely of acquiring a stock-response
mythology known as the American way of life. Canadian elementary teaching
has been less obsessed by social mythology, as its children do not require
the indoctrination that citizens ofa great world power do, but it has
its own kind, as in fact do all societies in all ages. Social mythology
in our day is a faint parody of the Christian mythology which preceded
it. “Things were simpler in the old days; the world has unaccountably
lost its innocence since we were children. I just live to get out ofthis
rat race for a bit and go somewhere where I can get away from it all.”
Yet there is a bracing atmosphere in competition and we may hope to see
consumer goods enjoyed by all members of our society after we abolish
poverty. The world is threatened with grave dangers from foreigners,
perhaps with total destruction; yet if we dedicate ourselves anew to the
tasks which lie before us we may preserve our way of life for generations
yet unborn. One recognizes the familiar outlines of paradise myths,
fall myths, exodus-from-Egypt myths, pastoral myths, apocalypse myths.
