---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 17 - ䷐ - Sui
    Line: 4
    Page: 121-122
By: Denis Ivanovich Fonvizin
---
Question： What is Courtiers’ Grammar? Answer： Courtiers’ Grammar
is the Art, or Science, of flattering cunningly, with tongue and pen,
Q： What is meant by “flattering cunningly”? A： It means uttering
and writing such untruth as may prove pleasing to those of high station
and, at the same time, of benefit to the flatterer, Q： What is Courtly
Untruth? A： It is the expression of a soul inglorious before the soul
vainglorious, It consists of shameless praises heaped upon a Great Man for
those services which he never performed and those virtues which he never had,
Q： Into how many categories are the mean-spirited souls divided? A： Six,
Q： What mean-spirited souls constitute the first Category? A： Those that
have contracted the miserable habit of cooling their heels in the anterooms
of Great Gentlemen all day and every day, without the least need therefor,
Q： What mean-spirited souls constitute the second Category? A： Those
that, standing in reverent awe in the presence of a Great Man, gaze into
his orbs in servility and thirst to anticipate his thoughts, so that
they may gratify him by base yea-saying, Q： What truly mean-spirited
souls constitute the third Category? A： Those that, before the face of
a Great Man, rejoice, out of sheer pusillanimity, in falsely imputing to
themselves all sorts of unheard-of things and in disavowing all things,
Q： And what mean-spirited souls constitute the fourth Category? A：
Those that exalt with great praises even such things in Great Gentlemen as
honest men ought to despise, Q： What truly mean-spirited souls constitute
the fifth Category? A： Those that, for their servility to the Great, are
shameless enough to accept rewards appertaining to meritorious services
alone, Q： What truly mean-spirited souls, then, constitute the sixth
Category? A： Those that, through the most contemptible dissembling,
deceive the Public： Outside the palace they seem the veriest Catos, they
clamor against flatterers, they revile without the least mercy all those
before whose mere gaze they tremble, they preach intrepidity and, from
their reports, one would gather that they alone, through their firmness,
are standing guard over the integrity of the fatherland and warding off
ruin from the unfortunate; but, once they set foot within the chambers of
the Sovereign, they undergo utter transformation： the tongue that had
reviled flatterers prompts them, of itself, to the ignoblest flattery; he
is a voiceless slave before the one whom he had reviled but half an hour
ago; the preacher of intrepidity is afraid of looking up inopportunely, of
inopportunely approaching; the guardian of the integrity of the fatherland
will be the first, if he find the chance, to stretch out his hand to plunder
the fatherland; the intercessor for the unfortunate rejoices, for the sake of
the smallest benefit accruing to him, in sending an innocent man to his ruin.
