---
Tags:
  - The Quest=The Fire Beyond the Tomb - Contemplating God, Faith, and Truth
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 13-15
  Source:
    Title: Does God Exist?
By: Hans Kung
---
With reference to the beginning of the universe, then, what point can there
be today in speaking not only -- scientifically -- about a big bang, models
of the universe, theories of the cosmos, but also with a perfect right --
theologically -- about a God who created heaven and earth： a God whom
people, particularly Christians and Jews, have acknowledged over and over
again in the light of the Old Testament? Certainly my age is nothing in
comparison with the age of mankind; but the age of mankind is nothing by
comparison with the thirteen billion years of this cosmos. And this earth
of ours is a speck of dust in comparison with the totality of the Milky Way,
which includes some hundred billion individual stars, one of them being the
sun. And, again, this Milky Way of ours is a speck of dust by comparison with
galactic clusters, some of which contain ten thousand galaxies, so that the
number of observable galaxies may well amount to a hundred million. The more,
then, I reflect on the amazing conclusions of astrophysics and, again, like
human beings from time immemorial, look up into the clear night sky, am I
not to wonder what it all means, where it all comes from? To answer, “Out
of nothing," is no explanation. Reasons cannot be satisfied with that. The
only serious alternative -- which, like so many other things, pure reason
admittedly cannot prove, since it transcends its horizon of experience --
is that the whole stems from thatfirst creative cause ofcauses, which we
call God and indeed the Creator God. And even ifI cannot prove him, I can
with good reason affirm him： in that reasonable, tested and enlzg'htened
trust in which I have already affirmed his existence. For if the God who
exists is truly God, then he is not only God for me here and now, but God
at the beginning, God from all eternity.

Could this be merely an illusion, could it be suspected of being a projection,
as Feuerbach and Freud suggested? Do I make this existing Creator God for
myself because I am afraid to be alone in the universe, because I feel the
horror of a vacuum, because I fear to draw the harsh conclusion that man is
abandoned to nothingness? Does not believing in God mean remaining always
a child and never growing up-as Freud expressed it? As we saw, there can
be no knowledge without some projection. Obviously, projection is involved
in my knowledge of the Creator God. Even someone who affirms a nothingness
likewise links a projection with nothingness. And yet I have every reason
to assume that my projection is not merely a projection, but that a reality
corresponds to it, that the reality of the Creator God meets my image of it,
confirming, correcting, infinitely surpassing it. What, then, does it mean
to believe in the Creator God?

Believing in the Creator of the world does not mean believing in any sort of
myths; neither does it mean imagining God as Creator in the form depicted
-- for instance -- by Michelangelo as artist when he painted him in a
completely human way on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. At this point,
all representations come to an end. Nor does believing in God as Creator
of the world mean deciding for one or another of the varying models of the
universe produced by leading scholars. This is impossible simply because
we are here concerned with what is presupposed to all models and to the
universe as a whole. Believing in the Creator of the world means affirming
in enlightened trust that the world and man do not remain inexplicable in
their ultimate source, that the world and man are not pointlessly hurled
from nothing into nothing, but that in their totality they are meaningful
and valuable, not chaos but cosmos; that they find their security first and
last in God their primal ground, originator, creator. Nothing forces me into
this faith. I can decidefor it absolutely freely. Once I have decided, then
this faith changes my position in the world, my attitude to the world; it
establishes my fundamental trust and give： concrete shape to my trust in God.

Since I believe in God as Creator, I can also affirm the world and man as
God's creation： respect men as my fellow men (and not as inferior beings);
respect and care for nonhuman nature -- especially animals -- as my environment
(and not as my natural enemies, not as material for arbitrary exploitation).
It is not although but because I am God’s creature, because my fellow
men and my environment are also God's creatures, that I and my fellow men
acquire and that my environment also -- despite all differences -- acquires a
dignity that has to be respected. The “subdue the earth” of the creation
story can never be a license for uninhibited exploitation and destruction
of nature and the environment： a principle that does not apply only at a
time when we are increasingly aware of the “limits of growth." Believing in
the Creator God of the world thus means accepting with greater seriousness,
greater realism, and greater hope my responsibility for my fellow men and
for the environment and the tasks assigned to me. Is it not appropriate to
make such a decision of faith in the Creator God for myself? Credo in Deum
omnipotentem, creatorem caeli et terrae.
