---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 305-308
  Source:
    Title: People of the Lie
By: M. Scott Peck
---
The evil deny the suffering of their guilt -- the painful awareness of
their sin, inadequacy, and imperfection -- by casting their pain onto
others through projection and scapegoating. They themselves may not suffer,
but those around them do. They cause suffering. The evil create for those
under their dominion a miniature sick society.

In reality, we exist not merely as individuals but as social creatures who
are integral component parts of a larger organism called society. Even
if we were to insist upon suffering in the definition ofillness, it
is neither necessary nor wise to conceive ofillness solely in terms of
the individual. It may be that the parents described were not themselves
suffering, but their families were. And the symptoms of family disorder --
depression, suicide, failing grades, and theft-- were attributable to their
leadership. In terms of “systems theory,” the suffering of the children
was symptomatic not of their own sickness but of that of their parents. Are
we to consider individuals healthy simply because they are not in pain --
no matter how much havoc and harm they bring to their fellow human beings?

Finally, who is to say what the evil suffer? It is consistently true that
the evil do not appear to suffer deeply. Because they cannot admit to
weakness or imperfection in themselves, they must appear this way. They
must appear to themselves to be continually on top ofthings, continually
in command. Their narcissism demands it. Yet we know they are not truly
on top of things. No matter how competent the parents described thought
themselves, we know that in fact they were incompetent in their parental
role. Their appearance of competence was just that： an appearance. A
pretense. Rather than being in command of themselves, it was their
narcissism that was in command, always demanding, whipping them into
maintaining their pretense of health and wholeness.

Think of the psychic energy required for the continued maintenance of the
pretense so characteristic ofthe evil! They perhaps direct at least as much
energy into their devious rationalizations and destructive compensations as
the healthiest do into loving behavior. Why? What possesses them, drives
them? Basically, it is fear. They are terrified that the pretense will
break down and they will be exposed to the world and to themselves. They
are continually frightened that they will come face-to-face with their
own evil. Of all emotions, fear is the most painful. Regardless ofhow
well they attempt to appear calm and collected in their daily dealings,
the evil live their lives in fear. It is a terror -- and a suffering --
so chronic, so interwoven into the fabric of their being, that they may
not even feel it as such. And if they could, their omnipresent narcissism
will prohibit them from ever acknowledging it. Even if we cannot pity
the evil for their inevitably ghastly Old age or for the state of their
souls after death, we can surely pity them for the lives they live of
almost unremitting apprehension.

Whether the evil suffer or not, the experience of suffering is so
subjective, and the meaning ofsuffering so complex, I think it best not to
define illness and disease in its terms. Instead, I believe that illness and
disease should be defined as any defect in the structure ofour bodies or our
personalities that prevents usfromfulfilling ourpotential as human beings.

Admittedly, we may have some differences of opinion as to what exactly
constitutes the human potential. Nonetheless, there are a sufficient number
of men and women in all cultures and at all times who have achieved in
their full adulthood a kind ofgracefulness ofexistence so that we can
generally say of them： “They have become truly human.” By which we
mean their lives seem almost to touch on the divine. And we can study these
people and examine their characteristics. Briefly, they are wise and aware;
they enjoy life with gusto, yet face and accept death; they not only work
productively but creatively, and they obviously love their fellow human
beings, whom they lead with a benignity of both intent and result.

Most people, however, are so crippled in body and spirit that they cannot
possibly ever attain such a lofty condition even through their best
efforts without massive therapeutic assistance. Among these crippled
legions -- the mass of suffering humanity -- the evil reside, perhaps
the most pitiable ofall.

I said there were two other reasons one might hesitate to label evil
an illness. They can be countered more briefly. One is the notion that
someone who is ill must be a victim. We tend to think of illness as
something that befalls us, a circumstance over which we have no control,
an unfortunate accident visited on us by meaningless fate, a curse in
the creation of which we did not participate.

Certainly many illnesses seem like this. But many others -- perhaps the
majority -- do not conform to such a pattern at all. Is the child who runs
out on the street, when he has been told not to, and gets hit by a car, a
victim? How about the driver ofa car who gets in an “accident” when he
is racing well above the speed limit to meet an appointment for which he is
late? Or let us examine the enormous variety of psychosomatic illnesses and
diseases of stress. Are people who suffer tension headaches because they
don't like their jobs victims? Of what? A woman has an asthmatic attack
every time she is in a situation in which she feels ignored, isolated,
and uncared for. Is she a victim? One way or another, to some extent,
all these people and a host of others victimize themselves. Their motives,
failures, and choices are deeply and intimately involved in the creation
of their injuries and diseases. Although they all have a certain degree
of responsibility for their condition, we still consider them ill.

Most recently this issue has been debated in reference to alcoholism--
some vigorously insisting that it is a disease and others insisting that
because it appears to be self-inflicted, it is not. Not only physicians
but courts and legislatures have been involved in this debate, and have
reached the conclusion that alcoholism is indeed a disease, despite the fact
that the alcoholic may sometimes seem nobody's victim except his or her own.

The issue of evil is similar. An individuals evil can almost always be
traced to some extent to his or her childhood circumstances, the sins of
the parents and the nature of their heredity. Yet evil is always also a
choice one has made -- indeed, a whole series ofchoices. The fact that
we are all responsible for the state of health of our souls does not
mean that a poor state of health is something other than disease. Once
again, I believe we are on safest and soundest ground when we do not
define disease in terms of victimization or responsibility but instead
hold onto the definition already offered： An illness or disease is any
defect in the structure of our bodies or personalities that prevents us
from fulfilling our potential as human beings.

The final argument against labeling evil an illness is the belief that
evil is a seemingly untreatable condition. Why designate as a disease a
condition for which there is neither known treatment nor cure? Had we an
elixir of youth in our doctor’s black bag, it might make good sense to
consider old age a disease, but we do not generally or currently think
of it so. We accept old age as an inevitable part of the human condition,
a natural process that is our lot and against which we are fools to rage.

This argument, however, ignores the fact that there are a whole host
of disorders, from multiple sclerosis to mental deficiency, for which
there is no treatment or cure but which we don’t hesitate to call
diseases. Perhaps we call them diseases because we hope to find the means
to combat them. But is this not the case with evil? It is true that we do
not currently possess any generally feasible or effective form of treatment
to heal the thoroughly evil of their hatred and destructiveness. Indeed,
the analysis of evil presented thus far reveals several reasons just
why it is an extraordinarily difficult condition to approach, much less
cure. But is a cure possible? Are we to simply throw up our hands in the
face of this difficulty and sigh, “It’s beyond us”? Even when it
is the greatest problem of mankind?

Rather than being an effective argument against it, the fact that we
currently do not know how to treat evil in the human individual is the best
reason to designate it a disease. For the label of disease implies that the
disorder is not inevitable, that healing should be possible, that it should
be studied scientifically and methods of treatment should be sought. If
evil is an illness, it should then become an object for research like
any other mental illness, be it schizophrenia or neurasthenia. It is the
central proposition ofthis book that the phenomenon ofevil can and should
be subjected to scientific scrutiny. We can and should move from our present
state of ignorance and helplessness toward a true psychology of evil.

The designation ofevil as a disease also obligates us to approach the
evil with compassion. By their nature the evil inspire in us more of a
desire to destroy than to heal, to hate than to pity. While these natural
reactions serve to protect the uninitiated, they otherwise prevent any
possible solution. I do not think we shall come any closer than we are
today to understanding and, I hope, curing human evil until the healing
professions name evil as an illness within the domain of their professional
responsibility.

There is a wise old priest retired to the mountains of North Carolina
who has long done battle with the forces of darkness. After he had done
me the favor ofreviewing a draft ofthis book he commented： “I am
glad that you have labeled evil an illness. It is not only a disease;
it is the ultimate disease.”
