---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 110-111
  Source:
    Title: Ecstasy
By: Marghanita Laski
---
(The scene is a jazz-club)

“Were there, thought Ray, we’ve done it. They‘re roaring, shouting,
threshing, but they can’t beat us. They can't drown us. He leant the
mike into the guts of the open upright, and let Louie come in with the
heavy, sharp chords off-rhythm, till they didn’t know, any of them,
who was playing, who was listening, but they were all playing and all
listening, and Larry came in high up in triplets, catching them by the
throat and holding them with sweet bitterness, his notes silver and hard,
cleanly coming and high again, Ray taking his note and Larry cutting out,
so that the change-over was impeccable. The crowd was gone, its noise the
sea’s noise or a waterfall, coming to it round the side of a hill, rising
and retreating, and he was alone on the hill, blasting and challenging
the sky with his lasciviously toned sax till the sky opened and there was
nothing beyond, and the challenge turned to praise, ecstatic, believing,
strong. The notes kept coming and the inspiration flowed in Ray like blood,
essential. The passion rushed out of him, and then Larry and Louie and
Hank were up there with him, all on the hilltop, all praising, and there
was nothing beyond nothing, and again nothing. There was rushing wind in
his ears, waves on sand, thunder, and the voice of the world in peace. The
hillside darkened and split, a negro stumbled up the slope, tears on his
face. His pink palms rattled on tight drum skins, giving an edge to the
deeper tenor. He swayed like a snake. The bass crashed to the ground and
Dix’s voice called to the soul wildly, extemporising mad parabolas of
sound. Larry hit G in altissimo and held it, a screaming fury, and then
shaking on it till the hillside crumbled and the sky came together and
they were back in the room with the lights and the crowd and the heat.

“There was stillness in the small room. ... There was no cheering, no
applause, just a gentle murmur as I the crowd’s] breath escaped. They
stared at Ray as though hypnotised, and a little afraid of what they
had seen and heard. They had seen Ray crouched over his alto, blind to
everything but the music, blowing something that was either profanity or
a prayer. ...

“[Ray] lurched to the centre of the dais, still dazed and still on
the hill alone, only now instead of nothing, there was poison, evil,
staring hatred. He stared back at the evil and the hatred with equal hatred.

“‘Is that what you wanted? Is that what you were yelling for? Well,
you got it. You got what you wanted. Do you know what you got? You got
every thing, heart, soul, guts and bones. There's nothing else left. Do
you understand? You bled me, sucked me dry. You asked for everything
and you got it. Do you know what you got. You got the world's passion,
the force of the hill I was on, where I saw nothing and everything and
it was beautiful. ...'"
