---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: II
    Page: 25
Title: A short stirring to meekness, and to the work of this book
---
Look up now, weak wretch, and see what thou art. What art thou, and what
hast thou merited, thus to be called of our Lord? What weary wretched heart,
and sleeping in sloth, is that, the which is not wakened with the draught
of this love and the voice of this calling! Beware, thou wretch, in this
while with thine enemy; and hold thee never the holier nor the better,
for the worthiness of this calling and for the singular form of living that
thou art in. But the more wretched and cursed, unless thou do that in thee
is goodly, by grace and by counsel, to live after thy calling. And insomuch
thou shouldest be more meek and loving to thy ghostly spouse, that He that
is the Almighty God, King of Kings and Lord of Lords, would meek Him so low
unto thee, and amongst all the flock of His sheep so graciously would choose
thee to be one of His specials, and sithen set thee in the place of pasture,
where thou mayest be fed with the sweetness of His love, in earnest of thine
heritage the Kingdom of Heaven.

Do on then, I pray thee, fast. Look now forwards and let be backwards; and
see what thee faileth, and not what thou hast, for that is the readiest
getting and keeping of meekness. All thy life now behoveth altogether to
stand in desire, if thou shalt profit in degree of perfection. This desire
behoveth altogether be wrought in thy will, by the hand of Almighty God and
thy consent. But one thing I tell thee. He is a jealous lover and suffereth
no fellowship, and Him list not work in thy will but if He be only with
thee by Himself. He asketh none help, but only thyself. He wills, thou
do but look on Him and let Him alone. And keep thou the windows and the
door, for flies and enemies assailing. And if thou be willing to do this,
thee needeth but meekly press upon him with prayer, and soon will He help
thee. Press on then, let see how thou bearest thee. He is full ready, and
doth but abideth thee. But what shalt thou do, and how shalt thou press?
