---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: VII
    Page: 32-33
Title: How a man shall have him in this work against all thoughts, and
  specially against all those that arise of his own curiosity, of cunning,
  and of natural wit
---
And if any thought rise and will press continually above thee betwixt thee and
that darkness, and ask thee saying, “What seekest thou, and what wouldest
thou have?” say thou, that it is God that thou wouldest have. “Him I
covet, Him I seek, and nought but Him.”

And if he ask thee, “What is that God?” say thou, that it is God that
made thee and bought thee, and that graciously hath called thee to thy
degree. “And in Him,” say, “thou hast no skill.” And therefore say,
“Go thou down again,” and tread him fast down with a stirring of love,
although he seem to thee right holy, and seem to thee as he would help thee
to seek Him. For peradventure he will bring to thy mind diverse full fair
and wonderful points of His kindness, and say that He is full sweet, and
full loving, full gracious, and full merciful. And if thou wilt hear him,
he coveteth no better; for at the last he will thus jangle ever more and
more till he bring thee lower, to the mind of His Passion.

And there will he let thee see the wonderful kindness of God, and if thou
hear him, he careth for nought better. For soon after he will let thee see
thine old wretched living, and peradventure in seeing and thinking thereof
he will bring to thy mind some place that thou hast dwelt in before this
time. So that at the last, or ever thou wit, thou shalt be scattered thou
wottest not where. The cause of this scattering is, that thou heardest him
first wilfully, then answeredest him, receivedest him, and lettest him alone.

And yet, nevertheless, the thing that he said was both good and holy. Yea,
and so holy, that what man or woman that weeneth to come to contemplation
without many such sweet meditations of their own wretchedness, the passion,
the kindness, and the great goodness, and the worthiness of God coming
before, surely he shall err and fail of his purpose. And yet, nevertheless, it
behoveth a man or a woman that hath long time been used in these meditations,
nevertheless to leave them, and put them and hold them far down under the
cloud of forgetting, if ever he shall pierce the cloud of unknowing betwixt
him and his God. Therefore what time that thou purposest thee to this work,
and feelest by grace that thou art called of God, lift then up thine heart unto
God with a meek stirring of love; and mean God that made thee, and bought thee,
and that graciously hath called thee to thy degree, and receive none other
thought of God. And yet not all these, but if thou list; for it sufficeth
enough, a naked intent direct unto God without any other cause than Himself.

And if thee list have this intent lapped and folden in one word, for thou
shouldest have better hold thereupon, take thee but a little word of one
syllable： for so it is better than of two, for ever the shorter it is
the better it accordeth with the work of the Spirit. And such a word is
this word GOD or this word LOVE. Choose thee whether thou wilt, or another;
as thee list, which that thee liketh best of one syllable. And fasten this
word to thine heart, so that it never go thence for thing that befalleth.

This word shall be thy shield and thy spear, whether thou ridest on peace or
on war. With this word, thou shalt beat on this cloud and this darkness above
thee. With this word, thou shall smite down all manner of thought under the
cloud of forgetting. Insomuch, that if any thought press upon thee to ask
thee what thou wouldest have, answer them with no more words but with this
one word. And if he proffer thee of his great clergy to expound thee that word
and to tell thee the conditions of that word, say him： That thou wilt have
it all whole, and not broken nor undone. And if thou wilt hold thee fast on
this purpose, be thou sure, he will no while abide. And why? For that thou
wilt not let him feed him on such sweet meditations of God touched before.
