---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 138-147
  Source:
    Title: Be Here Now
By: Ram Dass
Title: Bhagwan Dass
---
I was in the Blue Tibetan with my friend and these other people, and in
walked this very extraordinary guy, at least extraordinary with regard
to his height. He was 6'7" and he had long blond hair and a long blond
beard. He was a Westerner, an American, and was wearing holy clothes-a dhoti
(a cloth Indian men wear instead of pants) and so on, and when he entered,
he came directly over to our table and sat down.

Now, up until then, I had found this interesting thing that I don’t
think I could have labeled until that moment. Once, when I had met Gesha
Wangyal at Freehold, N.l., I knew I was meeting a being who “knew,”
but I couldn‘t get to it because I wasn’t ready, somehow. We were
very closewe loved each other extraordinarily, but I hadn’t been able
to really absorb whatever I needed to absorb. Now here was this young
fellow and again, I had the feeling I had met somebody who “Knew.”

I don't know how to describe this to you, except that I was deep in my
despair： I had gone through game, after game, after game, first being
a professor at Harvard, then being a psychedelic spokesman, and still
people were constantly looking into my eyes, like “Do you know?” Just
that subtle little look, and I was constantly looking into their eyes --
“Do you know?” And there we were, “Do you?” “Do you?” “Maybe
he...” “Do you... P” And there was always that feeling that everybody
was very close and we all knew we knew, but nobody quite knew. I don‘t
know how to describe it, other than that.

And I met this guy and there was no doubt in my mind. It was just like
meeting a rock. It was just solid, all the way through. Everywhere I
pressed, there he was!

We were staying in a hotel owned by the King or the Prince, or something,
because we were going first class, so we spirited this fellow up to
our suite in the Sewalti Hotel and for five days we had a continuing
seminar. We had this extraordinarily beautiful Indian sculptor Harish
Johari, who was our guide and friend. Harish, this fellow, Bhagwan Dass and
David and I sat there and for five days high on Peach Melbas and Hashish
and Mescaline, we had a seminar with Alexandra David Neehl’s books and
Sir John Woodroffe’s Serpent Power, and so on. At the end of five days,
I was still absolutely staggered by this guy. He had started to teach me
some mantras and working with beads. When it came time to leave, to go
to Japan, I had the choice ofgoing on to Japan on my first-class route,
or going off with this guy, back into India on a temple pilgrimage. He had
no money and I had no money and it was going to change my style of life
considerably. I thought, "Well, look, I came to India to find something
and I still think this guy knows -- I’m going to follow him."

But there was also the counter thought, “I-Iow absurd-~who’s writing
this bizarre script. Here I am-I’ve come half-way around the world and
I’m going to follow, through India, a 23-year-old guy from Laguna Beach,
California.”

I said to I-Iarish and to David, “Do you think I’m making a
mistake?" And Harish said, “No, he is a very high guy.” And so I
started to follow him -- literally follow him.

Now, I’m suddenly barefoot. He has said, “You’re not going to wear
shoes, are you?" That sort of thing. And I’ve got a shoulder bag and
my dhoti and blisters on my feet and dysentery, the likes of which you
can't imagine, and all he says is, “Well, fast for a few days."

He’s very compassionate, but no pity.

And we’re sleeping on the ground, or on these wooden tables that you
get when you stop at monasteries, and my hip bones ache. I go through
an extraordinary physical breakdown, become very childlike and he takes
care of me. And we start to travel through temples -- to Baneshwar and
Konarak and so on.

I see that he’s very powerful, so extraordinarily powerful -- he's got an
ectara, a one-stringed instrument, and I’ve got a little Tibetan drum,
and we go around to the villages and people rush out and they touch our
feet because We’re holy men, which is embarrassing to me because I’m
not a holy man -- I'm obviously who I am-- a sort of overage hippie,
Western explorer, and I feel very embarrassed when they do that and they
give us food. And he plays and sings and the Hindu people love him and
revere him. And he’s giving away all my money. ...

But I'm clinging tight to my passport and my return ticket to America,
and a traveler's check that I’ll need to get me to Delhi. Those things
I’m going to hold on to. And my bottle of LSD, in case I should find
something interesting.

And during these travels he’s starting to train me in a most interesting
way. We‘d be sitting somewhere and I'd say,

“Did I ever tell you about the time that Tim and I...”

And he'd say, “Don’t think about the past. Just be here now.” Silence.

And I'd say, “How long do you think we’re going to be on this trip?”

And he’d say, “Don’t think about the future. Just be here now.”

I'd say, “You know, I really feel crummy, my hips are hurting...”

“Emotions are like waves. Watch them disappear in the distance on the
vast calm ocean."

He had just sort of wiped out my whole game. That was it--that was my
whole trip -- emotions, and past experiences, and future plans. I was,
after all, a great story teller.

So we were silent. There was nothing to say.

He'd say, “You eat this," or, “Now you sleep here.” And all the
rest of the time we sang holy songs. That was all there was to do.

Or he would teach me Asanas -- Hatha Yoga postures.

But there was no conversation. I didn’t know anything about his life. He
didn’t know anything about my life. He wasn’t the least bit interested
in all of the extraordinary dramas that I had collected. ... He was the
first person I couldn’t seduce into being interested in all this. He
just didn’t care.

And yet, I never felt so profound an intimacy with another being. It was
as if he were inside of my heart. And what started to blow my mind was
that everywhere we went, he was at home.

If we went to a Thereavaden Buddhist monastery, he would be welcomed
and suddenly he would be called Dharma Sara, a Southern Buddhist name,
and some piece of clothing he wore, I suddenly saw, was also worn by all
the other monks and I realized that he was an initiate in that scene and
they'd welcomed him and he’d be in the inner temple and he knew all
the chants and he was doing them.

We’d come across some Shavites, followers of Shiva, or some of the Swamis,
and I suddenly realized that he was one of them. On his forehead would
be the appropriate tilik, or mark, and he would be doing their chanting.

We’d meet Kargyupa lamas from Tibet and they would all welcome him as a
brother, and he knew all their stuff. He had been in India for five years,
and he was so high that everybody just welcomed him, feeling “he’s
obviously one of us."

I couldn’t figure out what his scene was. All I personally felt was this

tremendous pull toward Buddhism because Hinduism always seemed a little
gauche -- the paintings were a little too gross -- the colors were
bizarre and the whole thing was too melodramatic and too much emotion. I
was pulling toward that clean, crystal-clear simplicity of the Southern
Buddhists or the Zen Buddhists.

After about three months, I had a visa problem and we went to Delhi, and
I was still quite unsure of my new role as a holy man and so when I got to
Delhi, I took $4.00 out of my little traveler’s check and bought a pair
of pants and a shirt and a tie and took my horn-rimmed glasses out of my
shoulder bag and stuck them back on and I became again Dr. Alpert, to go
to the visa office. Dr. Alpert, who had a grant from the Folk Art Museum
of New Mexico for collecting musical instruments and I did my whole thing.

I kept my beads in my pocket. Because I didn’t feel valid in this other
role. And then the minute I got my visa fixed, he had to have his annual
visa worked over, and he had to go to a town nearby, which we went to,
and we were welcomed at this big estate and given a holy man’s house,
and food brought to us, and he said, “You sit here. I’m going to see
about my visa.”

He told me just what to do. I was just like a baby. “Eat this.” “Sit
here.” “Do this.” And I just gave up. He knew. Do you know? I’ll
follow you. He spoke Hindi fluently. My Hindi was very faltering. So he
could handle it all.

We had spent a few weeks in a Chinese Buddhist monastery in Sarnath,
which was extraordinarily powerful and beautiful, and something was
happening to me but I couldn’t grasp the total nature ofit at all.

There was a strange thing about him. At night he didn’t seem to sleep
like I did. That is, any time I’d wake up at night, I’d look over
and he would be sitting in the lotus position. And sometimes I’d
make believe I was asleep and then open sort of a half-eye to see if he
wasn't cheating-maybe he was sleeping Now -- but he was always in the
lotus posture.

Sometimes I’d see him lie down, but I would say that 80 percent of the
time when I would be sleeping heavily, he would be sitting in some state
or other, which he’d never describe to me. But he was not in personal
contactI mean, there was no wave or moving around, or nothing seemed to
happen to him.

The night at that estate, I went out -- I had to go to the bathroom and
I went out under the stars and the following event happened. ...

The previous January 20th, at Boston in the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital,
my mother had died of a spleen illness -- the bone marrow stopped producing
blood and the spleen took over and grew very large and they removed it
and then she died. It had been a long illness and I had been with her
through the week prior to her death and through it we had become extremely
close. We had transcended mother-child and personalities and we had come
into true contact. I spent days in the hospital just meditating. And

I felt no loss when she died. Instead there was a tremendous continuing
contact with her. And in fact, when I had been in Nepal, I had had a vision
of her one night when I was going to bed. I saw her up on the ceiling and
I was wondering whether to go to India or go on to Japan, and she had
a look that was the look of “You damn fool- you’re always getting
into hot water, but go ahead, and I think that’s great." She looked
peeved-pleased. It was like there were two beings in my mother. She was a
middle-class woman from Boston, who wanted me to be absolutely responsible
in the most culturally acceptable fashion, and then there was this swinger
underneath-this spiritual being underneath who said, “ -- go, baby." And I
felt these two beings in that look which supported my going back into India.

This night I’m under the stars, and I hadn’t thought about her at all
since that time. I'm under the stars, urinating, and I look up and the
stars are very close because it's very dark and I suddenly experience
a presence of mother, and I'm thinking about her -- not about how she
died or anything about that. I just feel her presence. It’s very very
powerful. And I feel great love for her and then I go back to bed.

Of course, Bhagwan Dass is not the least interested in any of my life,
so he’d be the last person I'd talk to about my thoughts or visions.

The next morning he says, “We’ve got to go to the mountains. I've
got a visa problem. We've got to go see my guru.”

Now the term “guru” had meant for me, in the West, a sort of highgrade
teacher. There was a Life article about Allen Ginsberg-“Guru goes
to Kansas"--- and Allen was embarrassed and said, “I'm not really a
guru.” And I didn’t know what a guru really was. ...

Bhagwan Dass also said we were going to borrow the Land Rover, which
had been left with this sculptor, to go to the mountains. And I said,
I didn’t want to borrow the Land Rover. I’d just gotten out of that
horrible blue box and I didn’t want to get back into it, and I didn’t
want the responsibility. David had left it with this Indian sculptor and
he wouldn’t want to loan it to us anyway. I got very sulky. I didn‘t
want to go see a guru -- and suddenly I wanted to go back to America in
the worst way.

I thought, “What am I doing? I’m following this kid and all he is ... ”

But he says, “We’ve got to do this," and so we go to the
town where the sculptor lives and within halfan hour the sculptor says,
“You have to go see your guru? Take the Land Rover!"

Well, that’s interesting.

We're in the Land Rover and he won’t let me drive. So I’m sitting
there sulking. He won’t let me drive and we are in the Land Rover
which I don’t want to have and I’m now really in a bad mood. I’ve
stopped smoking hashish a few days before because I’m having all kinds
of reactions to it, and so I’m just in a very, very uptight, negative
paranoid state and all I want to do is go back to America and suddenly
I’m following this young kid who wants to drive and all he wanted me
for was to get the Land Rover and now the whole paranoid con world fills
my head. I’m full ofit.

We go about 80 or 100 miles and we come to a tiny temple by the side
of the road in the foothills of the Himalayas. We’re stopping and I
think we’re stopping because a truck’s coming by, but when we stop,
people surround the car, which they generally do, but they welcome him
and he jumps out. And I can tell something’s going to happen because
as we go up into the hills, he’s starting to cry.

We’re singing songs and tears are streaming down his face, and I know
something’s going on, but I don’t know what.

We stop at this temple and he asks where the guru is and they point up on
a hill, and he goes running up this hill and they’re all following him,
so delighted to see him. They all love him so much.

I get out of the car. Now I’m additionally bugged because everybody’s
ignoring me. And I’m following him and he’s way ahead of me and I’m
running after him barefoot up this rocky path and I’m stumbling -- by
now my feet are very tough-but still his legs are very long and I’m
running and people are ignoring me and I’m very bugged and I don’t
want to see the guru anyway and what the hell. --

We go around this hill so that we come to a field which does not face on
the road. It’s facing into a valley and there’s a little man in his
603 or 705 sitting with a blanket around him. And around him are eight
or nine Hindu people and it’s a beautiful tableau -- clouds, beautiful
green valley, lovely, lovely place -- the foothills of the Himalayas.

And this fellow, Bhagwan Dass, comes up, runs to this man and throws
himselfon the ground, full-face doing “dunda pranam,” and he’s
stretched out so his face is down on the ground, full-length and his
hands are touching the feet of this man, who is sitting cross-legged. And
he’s crying and the man is patting him on the head and I don’t know
what’s happening.

I’m standing on the side and thinking “I’m not going to touch his
feet. I don’t have to. I’m not required to do that.” And every now
and then this man looks up at me and he twinkles a little. But I’m so
uptight that I couldn’t care less. Twinkle away, man!

Then he looks up at me-- he speaks in Hindi, of which I understand maybe
half, but there is a fellow whos translating all the time, who hangs out
with him, and the guru says to Bhagwan Dass, “You have a picture of
me?" Bhagwan Dass nods, “Yes.”

“Give it to him," says the man, pointing at me.

“That’s very nice, I think, giving me a picture of himself, and I
smile and nod appreciatively. But I’m still not going to touch his feet!

Then he says, “You came in a big car?" Of course that’s the one thing
I’m really uptight about.

“Yeah.”

So he looks at me and he smiles and says, “You give it to me?”

I started to say, “Wha ... ” and Bhagwan Dass looks up -- he’s
lying there -- and he says, “Maharaji (meaning ‘great king’),
if you want it you can have it -- it’s yours.”

And I said, “No -- now wait a minute -- you can't give away David’s
car like that. That isn't our car...” and this old man is laughing. In
fact, everyone is laughing. . .except me.

Then he says, “You made much money in America?”

“Ah, at last he’s feeding my ego,” I think.

So I flick through all of my years as a professor and years as a smuggler
and all my different dramas in my mind and I said, “Yeah.”

“How much you make?”

Well, I said, at one time -- and I sort of upped the figure a bit, you know,
my ego -- $25,000.

So they all converted that into rupees which was practically half the
economic base of India, and everybody was terribly awed by this figure,
which was complete bragging on my part. It was phony -- I never made
$25,000. And he laughed again. And he said,

“You’ll buy a car like that for me?"

And I remember what went through my mind. I had come out of a family of
fund-raisers for the United Jewish Appeal, Brandeis, and Einstein Medical
School, and I had never seen hustling like this. He doesn’t even know
my name and already he wants a $7,000 vehicle.

And I said, “Well, maybe . . The whole thing was freaking me so much.

And he said, “Take them away and give them food.” So we were taken
and given food -- magnificent food -- we were together still, and saddhus
brought us beautiful food and then we were told to rest. Some time later
we were back with the Maharaji and he said to me, “Come here. Sit.”
So I sat down and he looked at me and he said,

“You were out under the stars last night.”

“Um-hum."

“You were thinking about your mother."

“Yes.” (“Wow,” I thought, “that’s pretty good. I never
mentioned that to anybody")

“She died last year."

“Um-hum.”

“She got very big in the stomach before she died.”

Pause. ..“Yes.”

He leaned back and closed his eyes and said, “Spleen. She died of
spleen.”

Well, what happened to me at that moment, I can’t really put into
words. He looked at me in a certain way at that moment, and two things
happened -- it seemed simultaneous. They do not seem like cause and effect.

The first thing that happened was that my mind raced faster and faster
to try to get leverage -- to get a hold on what he had just done. I went
through every super CIA paranoia I've ever had：

“Who is he?” “Who does he represent?”

“Where’s the button he pushes where the file appears?” and “Why
have they brought me here?”

None of it would jell.

It was just too impossible that this could have happened this way. The guy I
was with didn’t know all that stuff, and I was a tourist in a car, and the
whole thing was just too far out. My mind went faster and faster and faster.

Up until then I had two categories for “psychic experience.” One
was “they happened to somebody else and they haven't happened to me,
and they were terribly interesting and we certainly had to keep an open
mind about it.” That was, my social science approach. The other one was,
“well, man, I’m high on LSD. Who knows how it really is? After all,
under the influence of a chemical, how do I know I’m not creating the
whole thing?” Because, in fact, I had taken certain chemicals where I
experienced the creation of total realities. The greatest example I have
of this came about through a drug called ]B 318, which I took in a room
at Millbrook. I was sitting on the third floor and it seemed like nothing
was happening at all. And into the room walked a girl from the community
with a pitcher oflemonade and she said, would I like some lemonade, and I
said that would be great, and she poured the lemonade, and she poured it
and she kept pouring and the lemonade went over the side of the glass and
fell to the floor and it went across the floor and up the wall and over
the ceiling and down the wall and under my pants which got wet and it came
back up into the glass-and when it touched the glass the glass disappeared
and the lemonade disappeared and the wetness in my pants disappeared and
the girl disappeared and I turned around to Ralph Metzner and I said,

“Ralph, the most extraordinary thing happened to me,” and Ralph
disappeared!

I was afraid to do anything but just sit. Whatever this is, it’s not
nothing. Just sit. Don't move, just sit!

So I had had experiences where I had seen myself completely create
whole environments under psychedelics, and therefore I wasn’t eager
to interpret these things very quickly, because I, the observer, was,
at those times, under the influence of the psychedelics.

But neither of these categories applied in this situation, and my
mind went faster and faster and then I felt like what happens when a
computer is fed an insoluble problem; the bell rings and the red light
goes on and the machine stops. And my mind just gave up. It burned out
its circuitry...its need to have an explanation. I needed something to
get closure at the rational level and there wasn‘t anything. There just
wasn’t a place I could hide in my head about this.

And at the same moment, I felt this extremely violent pain in my chest
and a tremendous wrenching feeling and I started to cry. And I cried and
I cried and I cried. And I wasn't happy and I wasn’t sad. It was not
that kind of crying. The only thing I could say was it felt like I was
home. Like the journey was over. Like I had finished.

Well, I cried and they finally sort of spooned me up and took me to the
home of devotee, K. K. Sah, to stay overnight. That night I was very
confused. A great feeling of lightness and confusion.

At one point in the evening I was looking in my shoulder bag and came
across the bottle of LSD.

“Wow! I've finally met a guy who is going to Know! He will definitely
know what LSD is. I’ll have to ask him. That’s what I’ll do. I’ll
ask him.” Then I forgot about it.

The next morning, at eight o’clock a messenger comes. Maharaji wants
to see you immediately. We went in the Land Rover. The three miles to
the temple. When I’m approaching him, he yells out at me, “Have you
got a question?”

And he’s very impatient with all of this nonsense, and he says,
“Where’s the medicine?”

I got a translation of this. He said medicine. I said, “Medicine?”
I never thought of LSD as medicine! And somebody said, he must mean the
LSD. “LSD?” He said, “Ah-cha -- bring the LSD.”

So I went to the car and got the little bottle of LSD and I came
back. “Let me see?”

So I poured it out in my hand -- “What’s that?”

“That‘s STP. ... That’s librium and that’s ... ” A little of
everything. Sort of a little traveling kit.

He says, “Gives you siddhis?”

I had never heard the word “siddhi” before. So I asked for a translation
and siddhi was translated as “power.” From where I was at in relation
to these concepts, I thought he was like a little old man, asking for
power. Perhaps he was losing his vitality and wanted vitamin B 12. That
was one thing I didn‘t have and I felt terribly apologetic because I
would have given him anything. If he wanted the Land Rover, he could have
it. And I said, “Oh, no, I’m sorry.” I really felt bad I didn’t
have any and put it back in the bottle.

He looked at me and extended his hand. So I put into his hand what’s
called a “White Lightning.” This is an LSD pill and this one was from
a special batch that had been made specially for me for traveling. And
each pill was 305 micrograms, and very pure. Very good acid. Usually
you start a man over 60, maybe with 50 to 75 micrograms, very gently,
so you won’t upset him; 300 of pure acid is a very solid dose.

He looks at the pill and extends his hand farther. So I put a second pill --
that’s 610 micrograms -- then a third pill -- that’s 915 micrograms--
into his palm.

That is sizeable for a first dose for anyone!

“Ah-cha.”

And he swallows them! I see them go down. There’s no doubt. And that
little scientist in me says, “This is going to be very interesting!”

All day long I’m there, and every now and then he twinkles at me and
nothing -- nothing happens! That was his answer to my question. Now you
have the data I have.
