---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 58-63
  Source:
    Title: The Seat of the Soul
By: Gary Zukav
---
The soul is. It has no beginning and no end but fiows toward wholeness. The
personality emerges as a natural force from the soul. It is an energy tool
that the soul adapts to function within the physical world. Each personality
is unique because the configuration of energy of the soul that formed it
is unique. It is the persona of the soul, so to speak, that interacts with
physical matter. It is a product that is formed from the vibrational aspect
of your name, the vibrational aspect of your relationship to planets at the
time of your incarnation, and vibrational aspects of your energy environment,
as well as from the splintered aspects of your soul that need to interact
in physical matter in order to be brought into wholeness.

The personality does not operate independently from the soul. To the extent
that a person is in touch with spiritual depths, the personality is soothed
because the energy of consciousness is focused on its energy core and not
on its artificial facade, which is the personality.

The personality sometimes appears as a force running rampant in the world
with no attachment to the energy ofits soul. This situation can be the
origin of what we call an evil human being, and it can be the origin ofa
schizophrenic human being. It is the result of the personality being unable to
find its reference point, or connection, to its mothership, which is its soul.
The conflicts of a human’s life are directly proportional to the distance
at which an energy of personality exists separately from the soul, and,
therefore, as we shall see, in an irresponsible position of creation. When
a personality is in full balance, you cannot see where it ends and the soul
begins. That is a whole human being.

What is involved in the healing of a soul?

Most of us are accustomed to the idea that we are responsible for some of our
actions, but not all of them. We consider ourselves responsible, for example,
for the good deed that brings our neighbor and us together, or for responding
to it positively, but we do not consider ourselves responsible for the argument
between us and our neighbor, or for responding to it negatively. We consider
ourselves responsible for having a safe trip if we take the time to check
the condition of the car before starting, but if we speed around a car that,
in our opinion, has been traveling too slowly, and almost cause an accident
by doing that, we consider the other driver to be responsible. If we feed
and clothe ourselves through our successful business, we credit ourselves.
If we feed and clothe ourselves by burglarizing apartments, we blame our
difficult childhood.

For many of us, being held responsible is equal to getting caught. A friend
who returns each year to his native Italy told me, with a twinkle in his eye,
of a dinner out with his family. When the bill came, my friend's father, who
is fastidious, examined each scribbled item. After some study, he deciphered
the last entry and recognized it to be a short expression that translates,
roughly, “If it goes, it goes.” He called the waiter and asked, “What
is this item?" The waiter shrugged, “It didn’t go." Many of us feel
that ifa clerk gives us too much change, and we take it, our life has been
affected only to the extent that we have come into an unexpected gain. In
fact, each of our acts affects us in far-reaching ways.

Every action, thought, and feeling is motivated by an intention, and that
intention is a cause that exists as one with an effect. If we participate
in the cause, it is not possible for us not to participate in the effect. In
this most profound way, we are held responsible for our every action, thought,
and feeling, which is to say, for our every intention. We, ourselves, shall
partake of the fruit of our every intention. It is, therefore, wise for us
to become aware of the many intentions that inform our experience, to sort
out which intentions produce which effects, and to choose our intentions
according to the effects that we desire to produce.

This is the way that we learned about physical reality as children, and that
we refine our knowledge of it as adults. We learn the effect of crying when
we are hungry, and we repeat the cause that brings us the effect that we
desire. We learn the effect of putting a finger in a light socket, and we
do not repeat the cause that produces that effect.

We also learn about intentions and their effects through our experiences
in physical reality, but learning that intentions produce specific effects,
and what those effects are, proceeds slowly when our learning must be done
solely through the density of physical matter. Anger, for example, causes
distance and hostile interactions. If we must learn this solely through
physical experience, we may have to experience ten, or fifty, or one hundred
and fifty circumstances of distance from another and hostile interaction
before we come to understand that it is the orientation of anger on our part,
the intention of hostility and distance, and not this particular action or
that, which produces the effect that we do not want. This is predominantly
the way that a five-sensory human learns.

The relationship of cause and effect within the domain of physical objects and
phenomena reflects a dynamic that is not limited to physical reality. This is
the dynamic of karma. Everything in the physical world, including each of us,
is a small part of dynamics that are more extensive than a five-sensory human
can perceive. The love, fear, compassion, and anger that you experience,
for example, are only a small part of the love, fear, compassion, and anger
ofa larger energy system that you do not see.

Within physical reality, the dynamic of karma is reflected by the third law
of motion： “For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.”
In other words, the great law of karma that governs the balancing of energy
within our evolutionary system is reflected within the domain of physical
objects and phenomena by the last of three principles, three laws of motion,
that govern the balancing of energy within physical reality.

The law of karma is an impersonal energy dynamic. When its effects are
personalized, that is, experienced from the point of view of the personality,
they are experienced as a reversal in the direction, a coming back to the
intender, of the energy of his or her intention. This is how the personality
experiences the impersonal dynamic that is described by the third law as an
“equal and opposite reaction.” The person who intends hatred for others
experiences the intention of hatred from others. The person who intends love
for others experiences the intention of love from others, and so forth.
The Golden Rule is a behavioral guide that is based upon the dynamic of
karma. A personalized statement of karma would be, “You receive from the
world what you give to the world.”

Karma is not a moral dynamic. Morality is a human creation. The Universe
does not judge. The law of karma governs the balancing of energy within our
system of morality and within those of our neighbors. It serves humanity as
an impersonal and Universal teacher of responsibility.

Every cause that has not yet produced its effect is an event that has
not yet come to completion. It is an imbalance of energy that is in the
process of becoming balanced. That balancing of energy does not always occur
within the span of a single lifetime. The karma of your soul is created and
balanced by the activities of its many personalities, including you. Often
a personality experiences effects that were created by other of its soul’s
personalities, and, conversely, creates energy imbalances that are not able to
right themselves within its own lifetime. Therefore, without knowledge of its
soul, reincarnation, and karma, it is not always possible for a personality
to understand the significance or the meaning of the events of its life,
or to understand the effects of its responses to them.

For example, a personality that takes advantage of others creates an imbalance
of energy that must be righted by the experience of being taken advantage
of by others. Ifthat cannot be accomplished within the lifetime of this
personality, another ofits soul’s personalities will experience being
taken advantage ofby other people. Ifthat personality does not understand
that the experience of being taken advantage of by others is the effect
of a previous cause, and that this experience is bringing to completion
an impersonal process, it will react from a personal point ofview rather
than from the point of view of its soul. It may become angry, for example,
or vengeful or depressed. It may lash out, or grow cynical or withdraw into
sorrow. Each of these responses creates karma, another imbalance of energy
which, in turn, must be balanced. In this way, one karmic debt has been paid,
so to speak, but another, or others, has been created.

If a child dies early in its life, we do not know what agreement was made
between that child's soul and the souls of its parents, or what healing was
served by that experience. Although we are sympathetic to the anguish ofthe
parents, we cannot judge this event, lfwe, or the parents ofthis child,
do not understand the impersonal nature of the dynamic that is in motion,
we may react with anger towards the Universe, or towards each other, or with
guilt if we feel that our actions were inadequate. All of these rejections
create karma, and more lessons for the soul to learn -- more karmic debts
for the soul to pay -- appear.

In order to become whole, the soul must balance its energy. It must experience
the effects that it has caused. The energy imbalances in the soul are the
incomplete parts of the soul that form the personality. Personalities in
interaction are souls that are seeking to heal. Whether an interaction between
souls is healing or not depends upon whether the personality involved can see
beyond itself and that ofthe other personality to the interaction of their
souls. This perception automatically draws forth compassion. Every experience,
and every interaction, provides you with an opportunity to look from the
point of view of your soul or from the point ofview of your personality.
What does this mean in practical terms? How does a personality begin to look
beyond itself and to see its soul in interaction with the souls of others?

Since we cannot know what is being healed through each interaction --
what karmic debts are coming to conclusion -- we cannot judge what we see.
For example, when we see a person sleeping in the gutter in the winter, we
do not know what is being completed for that soul. We do not know whether
that soul has engaged in cruelty in another lifetime, and now has chosen
to experience the same dynamic from an entirely different point of view,
as, for example, the target of charity. It is appropriate that we respond
to his or her circumstance with compassion, but it is not appropriate that
we perceive it as unfair, because it is not.

There are personalities that are selfish and hostile and negative, but even
in these cases we cannot fully know the reasons why. These are hidden from
view. That does not mean that we cannot recognize negativity when we see it,
but we cannot judge it. That is not our place, lfwe intervene in an argument,
or break up a fight, it is not appropriate that we judge the participants.
Of one thing we can be certain： a person that is engaging in violence is
hurting deeply, because a healthy and balanced soul is incapable of harming
another.

When we judge, we create negative karma. Judgment is a function of the
personality. When we say of another soul, “She is worthy,” or, “He is not
worthy," we create negative karma. When we say ofan action, “This is right,"
or, “That is wrong," we create negative karma. This does not mean that we
should not act appropriately to the circumstances in which we find ourselves.

If our car is hit by another car, for example, and the driver of the other
car is drunk, it is appropriate that the other driver be held responsible,
through the courts, for the repair ofour car. It is appropriate that he or she
be prohibited from driving while intoxicated. It is not appropriate that we
allow our actions to be motivated by feelings of indignation, righteousness,
or victimization. These feelings are the result of judgments that we make
about ourselves and the other person, assessments through which we see
ourselves as superior to another being.

If we act upon these feelings, not only do we increase the karmic obligations
of our soul, but we also are not able to enter into these feelings and learn
from them. Feelings, as we shall see, are the means through which we can
discern the parts ofitself that the soul seeks to heal, and through which
we come to see the action of the soul in physical matter. The road to your
soul is through your heart.

If we are to engage the viewpoint of the soul, we must cease from judging,
even those events that appear to be unfathomable, such as the cruelty of an
inquisition or a holocaust, the death of an infant, the prolonged agony of
a death by cancer, or a life confined to a bed. We do not know what is being
healed in these sufferings, or the details of the energetic circumstance that
is coming into balance. It is appropriate that we allow ourselves to feel
the compassion that such circumstances call forth in us and to act upon it,
but if we allow ourselves to judge these events and those who participate
in them, we create negative karma that must be balanced, and we, ourselves,
will be among those souls that choose to participate in circumstances that
are necessary to that balancing.

If we do not judge, how can there be justice?

Gandhi was beaten several times during his life. Although on two occasions he
nearly died, he refused to prosecute his attackers because he saw that they
were doing “what they thought was right.” This position of non-judgmental
acceptance was central in Gandhi’s life. The Christ did not judge even
those who spit in His face, and who subjected Him without mercy to His pain
and humiliation. He asked forgiveness, not vengeance, for those who tortured
Him. Did neither the Christ nor Gandhi know the meaning of justice? They
knew non-judgmental justice.

What is non-judgmental justice?

Non-judgmental justice is a perception that allows you to see everything in
life, but does not engage your negative emotions. Non-judgmental justice
relieves you ofthe self-appointed job ofjudge and jury because you know
that everything is being seen -- nothing escapes the law of karma -- and
this brings forth understanding and compassion. Non-judgmental justice is
the freedom of seeing what you see and experiencing what you experience
without responding negatively. It allows you to experience directly the
unobstructed How ofthe intelligence, radiance, and love ofthe Universe of
which our physical reality is a part. Non-judgmental justice Hows naturally
from understanding the soul and how it evolves.

This, then, is the framework ofour evolutionary process： the continual
incarnation and reincarnation of the energy of the soul into physical
reality for the purposes of healing and balancing its energy in accordance
with the law of karma. Within this framework we evolve, as individuals and
as a species, through the cycle of being unempowered to becoming empowered,
yet the experiences that we encounter in this process need not be the kind
that we have encountered to now.
