---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XIV
    Page: 44
Title: That without imperfect meekness coming before, it is impossible
  for a sinner to come to the perfect Virtue of meekness in this life
---
For although I call it imperfect meekness, yet I had liefer have a true
knowing and a feeling of myself as I am, and sooner I trow that it should
get me the perfect cause and virtue of meekness by itself, than it should
an all the saints and angels in heaven, and all the men and women of Holy
Church living in earth, religious or seculars in all degrees, were set at
once all together to do nought else but to pray to God for me to get me
perfect meekness. Yea, and yet it is impossible a sinner to get, or to keep
when it is gotten, the perfect virtue of meekness without it.

And therefore swink and sweat in all that thou canst and mayest, for to
get thee a true knowing and a feeling of thyself as thou art; and then I
trow that soon after that thou shalt have a true knowing and a feeling of
God as He is. Not as He is in Himself, for that may no man do but Himself;
nor yet as thou shalt do in bliss both body and soul together. But as it is
possible, and as He vouchsafeth to be known and felt of a meek soul living
in this deadly body.

And think not because I set two causes of meekness, one perfect and another
imperfect, that I will therefore that thou leavest the wholly to get thee
perfect. Nay, surely; I trow thou shouldest never bring it so about. But
herefore I do that I do： because I think to tell thee and let thee see
the worthiness of this ghostly exercise before all other exercise bodily or
ghostly that man can or may do by grace. How that a privy love pressed in
cleanness of spirit upon this dark cloud of unknowing betwixt thee and thy
God, truly and perfectly containeth in it the perfect virtue of meekness
without any special or clear beholding of any thing under God. And because
I would that thou knewest which were perfect meekness, and settest it as a
token before the love of thine heart, and didst it for thee and for me. And
because I would by this knowing make thee more meek.

For ofttimes it befalleth that lacking of knowing is cause of much pride as
me thinketh. For peradventure an thou knewest not which were perfect meekness,
thou shouldest ween when thou hadst a little knowing and a feeling of this that
I call imperfect meekness, that thou hadst almost gotten perfect meekness：
and so shouldest thou deceive thyself, and ween that thou wert full meek
when thou wert all belapped in foul stinking pride. And therefore try for
to travail about perfect meekness; for the condition of it is such, that
whoso hath it, and the whiles he hath it, he shall not sin, nor yet much after.
