---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 269-270
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Judgement=Judgment Day
  - 266
  - 816
  - 464
  - 670
By: Boehme
Reference:
  Title: Le Roi du Monde
  Chapter: VII 'Luz ou te séjour d'immortalité.'
  By: Guenon
---
The last judgement is a kindling of the fire both of God’s love and
anger, in which the matter of every substance perisheth, and each fire
shall attract into itself its own, that is, the substance that is like
itself： Thus God’s fire of love will draw into it whatsoever is born
in the love of God, or love-principle, in which also it shall burn
after the manner of love, and yield itself into that substance. But
the torment will draw into itself what is wrought in the anger of God
in darkness, and consume the false substance; and then there will
remain only the painful aching will in its own proper nature, image,
and figure.

With what matter and form shall the human body rise?

It is sown a natural gross and elementary body, which in this lifetime
is like the outward elements; yet in this gross body there is a subtle
power and virtue.  As in the earth also there is a subtle good virtue,
which is like the sun, and is one and the same with the sun; which
also in the beginning of time did spring and proceed out of the divine
power and virtue, from whence all the good virtue of the body is
likewise derived. This good virtue of the mortal body shall come again
and live for ever in a kind of transparent chrystalline material
property, in spiritual flesh and blood; as shall return also the good
virtue of the earth, for the earth likewise shall become chrystalline,
and the divine light shine in everything that hath a being, essence,
or substance. And as the gross earth shall perish and never return, so
also the gross flesh of man shall perish and not live for ever. But
all things must appear before the judgement, and in the judgement be
separated by the fire; yea, both the earth, and also the ashes of the
human body. For when God shall once move the spiritual world, every
spirit shall attract its spiritual substance to itself. A good spirit
and soul shall draw to itself its good substance, and an evil one its
evil substance. But we must here understand by substance, such a
material power and virtue, the essence of which is mere virtue, like a
material tincture (such a thing as hath all figures, colours, and
virtues in it, and is at the same time transparent), the grossness
whereof is perished in all things.
