---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 457
  Source:
    Title: Revelation
    Locus: II 9
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Synagogue of Satan
  - Prejudice=Anti-Semitism
References:
  - Body: |
      There are many mistakes in translation from the original texts to the
      context of your Bible, as well as many false prophecies. Many of these
      were brought about through lack of understanding of the characters and
      symbols with which the translators were dealing. ... The greater
      majority, however, were base falsehoods, perpetrated deliberately to
      mystify, to mislead, and to subvert the original gospel of the House
      of Israel.

      The first name was Is rael, meaning the Crystal or pure white race,
      the first race that ever inhabited the world, the original or root
      race from which all other races sprang. ...

      The Jews are with us： we can trace their history step by step, down
      the ages, from the House of Judah to the tribe of Judah, and down to
      the present day. They are one of the standing signs of the great race
      that has assisted in preserving the God ideal, until all races are
      restored into one race, with the Christ of God. the controlling
      factor. ... The culmination of this accomplishment will place the
      capstone upon the Great Pyramid.
    Description: This passage purports to be spoken by a 'Rishi'
      encountered by Spalding and his followers in Northern India
    Source: Baird T. Spalding： op. cit.. vol. III. pp. 169. 171. 180
  - Body: |
      Indeed, we may look on the Great Pyramid as the first true Masonic
      temple in the world, surpassing all others that have ever been built,
      with their secrets depicted in stone, symbolically, to be read by
      those who have been initiated into the secret mysteries of their
      religion.
    Source: Albert Churchward： Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man,
      pp. 9 - 10： in Basil Stewart： History and Significance of the
      Great Pyramid, London, n.d.. p. 196.
---
I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but
are the synagogue of Satan.
