---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 1016
  Source:
    Title: Revelation
    Locus: III 7-12
Tags:
  - 1013
  - 924
  - 457
  - 410
  - 902
  - 832
Commentary: |
  \'It may be interesting to note, that in the writings of some Kabbalists
  the Great Name of God appears as the supreme object of meditation in the
  last hour of the martyrs. In a powerful speech of the great mystic Abraham
  ben Eliezer Halevi of Jerusalem (died about 1530) we find a recommendation
  to those who face martyrdom. He advises them to concentrate, in the hour of
  their last ordeal, on the Great Name of God; to imagine its radiant letters
  between their eyes and to fix all their attention on it. Whoever does this,
  will not feel the burning flames or the tortures to which he is subjected.
  "And although this may seem improbable lo human reason, it has been
  experienced and transmitted by the holy martyrs'" (Scholem： Major Trends
  in Jewish Mysticism, p. 146). Other instances of invocation surmounting
  martyrdom are given in The Wonders of the Hotv Sam e [see under Index of
  Sources), and in Japa Yoga, by Swami Sivananda, p. 16.
---
And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write： These things saith
he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that
openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth;

I know thy works; behold. I have set before thee an open door, and no man
can shut it; for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and
hast not denied my name.

Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews,
and are not, but do lie; behold. I will make them to come and worship before
thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth.

Behold, I come quickly; hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take
thy crown. Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the name of my God,
and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh
down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon him my new name.
