---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 52
  Source:
    Title: The Divine Milieu
By: Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
---
What science will ever be able to reveal to man the origin, nature and
character of that conscious power to will and to love which constitutes his
life? It is certainly not our effort, nor the effort of anyone around us,
which set that current in motion. And it is certainly not our solicitude,
nor that of any friend, which prevents its ebb or controls its turbulence. We
can, of course, trace back through generations some of the antecedents of
the torrent which bears us along; and we can, by means of certain moral and
physical disciplines and stimulations, regularise or enlarge the aperture
through which the torrent is released into us. But neither that geography
nor those artifices help us in theory or in practice to harness the sources
oflife. My selfis given to me far more than it is formed by me. Man, Scripture
says, cannot add a cubit to his stature. Still less can he add a unit to the
potential of his love, or accelerate by another unit the fundamental rhythm
which regulates the ripening of his mind and heart. In the last resort the
profound life, the fontal life, the new-born life, escape our grasp entirely.

Stirred by my discovery, I then wanted to return to the light of day and forget
the disturbing enigma in the comfortable surroundings of familiar things --
to begin living again at the surface without imprudently plumbing the depths
of the abyss. But then, beneath this very spectacle of the turmoil oflife,
there re-appeared, before my newly opened eyes, the unknown thatl wanted
to escape. This time it was not hiding at the bottom of an abyss; it was
concealed beneath the innumerable strands which form the web of chance,
the very stuffof which the universe and my own small individuality are
woven. Yet it was the same mystery without a doubt： I recognised it. Our
mind is perplexed when we try to plumb the depth of the world beneath us.
But it reels still more when we try to number the favourable chances which
must conjoin at every moment ifthe least ofliving things is to survive and
to succeed. After the consciousness of being something other and something
greater than myself -- a second thing made me dizzy： namely, the supreme
improbability, the tremendous unlikelihood of finding myselfexisting in the
midst ofa world that has survived and succeeded.
