---
By: Han Yu
Format: verse
Source:
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "5 - ䷄ - Hsu"
    Line: 5
    Page: 40-41
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
---
Delicate clouds roll up and disappear
The sky is so bright that you cannot see the Milky Way;
A pure wind blows through the empty heavens,
The rays of the moon are scattered o'er the waves;
Murmur and shadow fade away on quiet sands and still waters.
One cup of wine we shall drink together,
Then you shall sing a song;
The lilt of your song is melancholy and the phrases full of bitter thoughts.
One cannot listen to the end before the tears fall like rain.
The Tung T'ing (lake) stretches away to the sky,
The Chiu I mountain is high;
Crocodiles and dragons come and go, apes and vampires cry,
Nine out of ten die before reaching this official post.
In squalid dark houses we hide ourselves,
When we left our beds we were frightened of snakes,
When we ate we were frightened of poison;
The summer air from the sea was damp and pestiferous,
The smells rank and rancid.
But there came a day when before the yamen they beat the big drum;
A new emperor had succeeded to the sacred line
And had elevated loyal servants.
An amnesty travels a thousand miles in a single day;
Those under sentence of death need not die,
The exiled ones were recalled,
The banished could return home.
All strains and impurities were to be things of the past.
The new emperor opens a bright new page,
Our senior officials suggest our names, his seniors suppress them;
Frustrated, what is left for us but to move to yet more barbaric surroundings?
Our present post is small and not to be spoken of,
How can we avoid being trampled and buffeted as we lie in the dust?
Most of our contemporaries follow the road back to official success,
But that road is dark and dangerous and hard to attain.
Your song -- come stop it,
Listen to my song.
My sentiments are very different from yours,
Of all the full moons in the year tonight's is the brightest.
Man from birth is governed by fate, and nothing else,
If you have wine and do not drink it
Will tomorrow be any the better?
