---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 450
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Malevolence
  - 266
By: Ibn 'Arabi
References:
  - Body: |
      Now was I come up in spirit through the flaming sword, into the
      paradise of God. All things were new： and all the creation gave
      another smell unto me than before, beyond what words can utter. 1 knew
      nothing but pureness, and innocency, and righteousness, being renewed
      up into the image of God by Christ Jesus, to the state of Adam, which
      he was in before he fell.. . . I was at a stand in my mind whether I
      should practise physic for the good of mankind, seeing the nature and
      virtues of the creatures were so opened to me by the Lord. But I was
      immediately taken up in spirit, to see into another or more steadfast
      state than Adam’s in innocency. even into a state in Christ Jesus that
      should never fall. ...

      I was sent to turn people from darkness to the light, that they might
      receive Christ Jesus： for, to as many as should receive Him in His
      light, I saw that He would give power to become the sons of God; which
      I had obtained by receiving Christ I was to bring people off from all
      the world's religions, which are vain.. . .  And I was to bring people
      off from Jewish ceremonies, and from heathenish fables, and from men’s
      inventions and windy doctrines, by which they blew the people about
      this way and the other way. from sect to sect; and from all their
      beggarly rudiments, with their schools and colleges for making
      ministers of Christ, who are indeed ministers of their own making but
      not of Christ’s; and from all their images and crosses, and sprinkling
      of infants, with all their holy days (so called) and all their vain
      traditions, which they had gotten up since the apostles’ days, which
      the Lord’s power was against. ... I was moved also to cry against all
      sorts of music. ...

      But the black earthly spirit of the priests wounded my life： and
      when I heard the bell toll to call people together to the
      steeple-house, it struck at my life.
    By: George Fox
    Source:
      Title: Journal
      Page: 17,20-23
---
The beetle cannot stand the perfume of the rose. ... In the same way,
the man with the beetle’s temperament, mentally and formally, cannot
stand the truth when he hears it, for it seems to him like vanity.
