---
Source:
  URL: https://tricycle.org/trikedaily/satipatthana-sutta-mindfulness/
  Translator: Thanissaro Bhikkhu
  Locus:
    Date: 5 March 2018
    Section: I
  Source:
    Title: Satipatthana Sutta
    ID: 34a30556-7dcf-465e-a9a7-7b3ac1f0f124
Title: Opening
By: Gautama Buddha
Glossary:
  - Term: Unbinding
    Definition: |
      Pali nibbana (Skt, nirvana) is the goal of practice. In
      everyday Pali, nibbana referred to the extinguishing of a
      fire. In the physics of the Buddha’s time, this did not
      mean that the fire went out of existence. Instead, while the
      fire was burning, it was seen to be in a state of agitation
      because it clung to its fuel and, as a result, was trapped
      there. When it let go of its fuel, it was freed and reached a
      state of calm. The implication of the image is that you are
      trapped by your experiences because you hold onto them -- they
      don’t hold onto you -- and you can reach freedom by letting go.
Commentary: |
  “In and of itself” here means that you stay focused on
  the experience of the body, etc., on its own terms, without
  reference to how it might function in the external world or
  in the worlds of your imagination.
---
I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying in the Kuru
country. Now there is a town of the Kurus called Kammasadhamma. There the
Blessed One [the Buddha] addressed the monks, “Monks.”

“Lord,” the monks responded to him.

The Blessed One said： “This is the direct path for the purification of
beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the disappearance
of pain and distress, for the attainment of the right method, and for
the realization of unbinding-in other words, the four establishings of
mindfulness. Which four?

“There is the case where a monk remains focused on the body in and
of itself-ardent, alert, and mindful-subduing greed and distress with
reference to the world. He remains focused on feelings ... mind ... mental
qualities in and of themselves -- ardent, alert, and mindful -- subduing
greed and distress with reference to the world.
