---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "6 - ䷅  - Sung"
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 51-52
By:
  - Robert Malise Bowyer Nichols
  - Maurice Browne
---
LIGHTFOOT. Coward! And not only you. (He rises.) All of you! Cowards! Maybe,
you’ve courage to die： but not one of you’ve courage to live.

(Angry murmurs.)

PRIME MINISTER. Francis! The fact that your ideas and ours do not chime ...

LIGHTFOOT. Ideas! The very substance of our beings doesn’t chime. Yours
is the Spirit of Yesterday： mine is the Spirit of Tomorrow.

(Murmurs. )

Must I tell you what every Board-school urchin knows?- that, among the
myriad orbs of the Milky Way there gyrates, in a minor solar system
a negligible planet, and that on this pea of a planet creeps a race
of parasites who know themselves for what they are! Isolated! Isolated
between the abyss of the unimaginably small, the atom, and the abyss of the
unimaginably great, the night about us. In that isolation, what refuge have
we but one another? What future but the future of all? What ethic but the
good -- not of one person, or of one nation -- but of Mankind? Answer me
that; you can’t! The day of the Takers is over, I tell you; the day of
the Giver dawns. And I inaugurate it -- with the greatest of all possible
gifts： mastery over matter. At last, Man is free to enlarge the Kingdom
of the Spirit; and so, whether the Sum of Things is justified or not,
to justify himself. And do you think, because the Spirit of Yesterday in
you is afraid, the Spirit of Tomorrow in me will run away? (Pause.)

ARTHUR. Then ... you refuse to destroy the secret?

LIGHTFOOT. Utterly!

PRIME MINISTER. Francis! (Silence) I beg you. (Silence) We have been very
patient. (He looks toward Lord Dedham.)

DUNNE (intervening). One moment. Lightfoot, I’m not a politician. I’m
an engineer; your uncle told you. Yes, and what's more, I’m one of
your “Boardschool urchins.” (Glancing about the Cabinet.) I came from
the gutter. Well, I planned a great scheme - perhaps you heard of it --
the hydroelectrification of the Balkans? LIGHTFOOT (interested), Yes. (He
sits down.)

DUNNE. My object was peace in the Balkans, by giving them prosperity. I
was on the eve of carrying the thing out -- when pressure was put on
me -- this government, that government, all over Europe - yes, and Asia,
and America, too -- but, above all, this government. I told ’em what
you’ve told ’em-- the Spirit of Tomorrow, Hope, Courage -- against
their vicious circle of sophistry and despair. And, in the end, I left
’em talking; and I went ahead. In three weeks an international crisis
had developed, which ifI hadn’t given way, would have led to another war
and wrecked civilization. That taught me my lesson. They asked me
here -- I was useful -- to join the Cabinet. And I’ve been useful! The
Dunne Internal Transportation Scheme -- you know. Take my advice, Lightfoot,
they know better than you or me the nature of the medium they work in.

PRIME MINISTER. I have the concurrence of my colleagues, Francis,
in saying that, if you will -- ergrant our request, we will put every
possible facility for research at your disposal.

(Cries of "Hear, hear.”)

Your sphere of usefulness -- to humanity -- will be incalculable. And
our facilities are only equaled by our -- er -- resources.

LIGHTFOOT (with a queer laugh). You’re trying to bribe me? Me -- the
master of the atom. How-- frightfully funny!

(Angry murmurs.)

PRIME MINISTER. Francis!

LIGHTFOOT (suddenly serious; he pushes his chair back, and rises). To
hell with the lot of you. (He starts to go.)

DEDHAM. Mr. Lightfoot, I advise you not to leave this room.

LIGHTFOOT. Ho ho! This begins to be interesting. First you cajole; then,
you bribe; now, you threaten.
