---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXXV
    Page: 68
Title: Of three means in the which a contemplative Prentice should be
  occupied, in reading, thinking, and praying
---
Nevertheless, means there be in the which a contemplative prentice should be
occupied, the which be these -- Lesson, Meditation, and Orison： or else to
thine understanding they may be called -- Reading, Thinking, and Praying. Of
these three thou shalt find written in another book of another man’s work,
much better than I can tell thee; and therefore it needeth not here to
tell thee of the qualities of them. But this may I tell thee： these three
be so coupled together, that unto them that be beginners and profiters --
but not to them that be perfect, yea, as it may be here -- thinking may not
goodly be gotten, without reading or hearing coming before. All is one in
manner, reading and hearing： clerks reading on books, and lewd men reading
on clerks when they hear them preach the word of God. Nor prayer may not
goodly be gotten in beginners and profiters, without thinking coming before.
See by the proof. In this same course, God’s word either written or spoken
is likened to a mirror. Ghostly, the eyes of thy soul is thy reason; thy
conscience is thy visage ghostly. And right as thou seest that if a foul spot
be in thy bodily visage, the eyes of the same visage may not see that spot
nor wit where it is, without a mirror or a teaching of another than itself;
right so it is ghostly, without reading or hearing of God’s word it is
impossible to man’s understanding that a soul that is blinded in custom
of sin should see the foul spot in his conscience.

And so following, when a man seeth in a bodily or ghostly mirror, or wots by
other men’s teaching, whereabouts the foul spot is on his visage, either
bodily or ghostly; then at first, and not before, he runneth to the well to
wash him. If this spot be any special sin, then is this well Holy Church,
and this water confession, with the circumstances. If it be but a blind
root and a stirring of sin, then is this well merciful God, and this water
prayer, with the circumstances. And thus mayest thou see that no thinking
may goodly be gotten in beginners and profiters, without reading or hearing
coming before： nor praying without thinking.
