---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 96-100
  Source:
    Title: Journey to Iztlan
By: Carlos Castaneda
---
I drove south and then east, following the roads I had always taken when
driving with don Juan. I parked my car around the place where the dirt
road ended and then I hiked on a familiar trail until I reached a high
plateau. I had no idea what to do there. I began to meander, looking for a
resting place. Suddenly I became aware of a small area to my left. It seemed
that the chemical composition of the soil was different on that spot, yet
when I focused my eyes on it there was nothing visible that would account
for the difference. I stood a few feet away and tried to “feel” as
don Iuan had always recommended I should do.

I stayed motionless for perhaps an hour. My thoughts began to diminish by
degrees until I was no longer talking to myself. I then had a sensation of
annoyance. The feeling seemed to be confined to my stomach and was more
acute when I faced the spot in question. I was repulsed by it and felt
compelled to move away from it. I began scanning the area with crossed
eyes and after a short walk I came upon a large flat rock. I stopped in
front ofit. There was nothing in particular about the rock that attracted
me. I did not detect any specific color or any shine on it, and yet I
liked it. My body felt good. I experienced a sensation ofphysical comfort
and sat down for a while.

I meandered in the high plateau and the surrounding mountains all day
without knowing what to do or what to expect. I came back to the flat
rock at dusk. I knew that if I spent the night there I would be safe.

The next day I ventured farther east into the high mountains. By late
afternoon I came to another even higher plateau. I thought I had been
there before. I looked around to orient myself but I could not recognize
any of the surrounding peaks. After carefully selecting a suitable place I
sat down to rest at the edge of a barren rocky area. I felt very warm and
peaceful there. I tried to pour out some food from my gourd, but it was
empty. I drank some water. It was warm and stale. I thought that I had
nothing else to do but to return to don Juan's house and began to wonder
whether or not I should start on my way back right away. I lay down on my
stomach and rested my head on my arm. I felt uneasy and changed positions
various times until I found myself facing the west. The sun was already
low. My eyes were tired. I looked down at the ground and caught sight
of a large black beetle. It came out from behind a small rock, pushing a
ball ofdung twice its size. I followed its movements for a long time. The
insect seemed unconcerned with my presence and kept on pushing its load
over rocks, roots, depressions, and protuberances on the ground. For all
I knew, the beetle was not aware that l was there. The thought occurred to
me that I could not possibly be sure that the insect was not aware of me;
that thought triggered a series of rational evaluations about the nature
of the insects world as opposed to mine. The beetle and I were in the
same world and obviously the world was not the same for both of us. I
became immersed in watching it and marveled at the gigantic strength it
needed to carry its load over rocks and down crevices.

I observed the insect for a long time and then I became aware of the
silence around me. Only the wind hissed between the branches and leaves of
the Chaparral. I looked up, turned to my left in a quick and involuntary
fashion, and caught a glimpse of a faint shadow or a flicker on a rock
a few feet away. At first I paid no attention to it but then I realized
that that flicker had been to my left. I turned again suddenly and was
able to clearly perceive a shadow on the rock. I had the weird sensation
that the shadow instantly slid down to the ground and the soil absorbed
it as a blotter dries an ink blotch. A chill ran down my back. The thought
crossed my mind that death was watching me and the beetle.

I looked for the insect again but I could not find it. I thought that it
must have arrived at its destination and then had dropped its load into
a hole in the ground. I put my face against a smooth rock.

The beetle emerged from a deep hole and stopped a few inches away from
my face. It seemed to look at me and for a moment I felt that it became
aware of my presence, perhaps as I was aware of the presence of my
death. I experienced a shiver. The beetle and I were not that different
after all. Death, like a shadow, was stalking both of us from behind the
boulder. I had an extraordinary moment ofelation. The beetle and I were
on a par. Neither of us was better than the other. Our death made us equal.

My elation and joy were so overwhelming that I began to weep. Don Juan was
right. He had always been right. I was living in a most mysterious world
and, like everyone else, I was a most mysterious thing, and yet I was no
more important than a beetle. I wiped my eyes and as I rubbed them with the
back of my hand I saw a man, or something which had the shape of a man. It
was to my right about fifty yards away. I sat up straight and strained to
see. The sun was almost on the horizon and its yellowish glow prevented
me from getting a clear view. I heard a peculiar roar at that moment. It
was like the sound of a distant jet plane. As I focused my attention on
it, the roar increased to a prolonged sharp metallic whizzing and then it
softened until it was a mesmerizing, melodious sound. The melody was like
the vibration of an electrical current. The image that came to my mind was
that two electrified spheres were coming together, or two square blocks
of electrified metal were rubbing against each other and then coming to
rest with a thump when they were perfectly leveled with each other. I
again strained to see ifI could distinguish the person that seemed to be
hiding from me, but I could only detect a dark shape against the bushes. I
shielded my eyes by placing my hands above them. The brilliancy of the
sunlight changed at that moment and then I realized that what I was seeing
was only an optical illusion, a play of shadows and foliage.

I moved my eyes away and I saw a coyote calmly trotting across the
field. The coyote was around the spot where I thought I had seen the man. It
moved about fifty yards in a southerly direction and then it stopped,
turned, and began walking toward me. I yelled a couple of times to scare
it away, but it kept on coming. I had a moment of apprehension. I thought
that it might be rabid and I even considered gathering some rocks to defend
myself in case of an attack. When the animal was ten to fifteen feet away
I noticed that it was not agitated in any way; on the contrary, it seemed
calm and unafraid. It slowed down its gait, coming to a halt barely four
or five feet from me. We looked at each other, and then the coyote came
even closer. Its brown eyes were friendly and clear. I sat down on the
rocks and the coyote stood almost touching me. I was dumbfounded. I had
never seen a wild coyote that close, and the only thing that occurred
to me at that moment was to talk to it. I began as one would talk to
a friendly dog. And then I thought that the coyote “talked” back
to me. I had the absolute certainty that it had said something. I felt
confused but I did not have time to ponder upon my feelings, because the
coyote “talked” again. It was not that the animal was voicing words
the way I am accustomed to hearing words being voiced by human beings,
it was rather a “feeling” that it was talking. But it was not like
a feeling that one has when a pet seems to communicate with its master
either. The coyote actually said something; it relayed a thought and that
communication came out in something quite similar to a sentence. I had
said, “How are you, little coyote?” and I thought I had heard the
animal respond, “I’m all right, and you?” Then the coyote repeated
the sentence and I jumped to my feet. The animal did not make a single
movement. It was not even startled by my sudden jump. Its eyes were still
friendly and clear. It lay down on its stomach and tilted its head and
asked, “Why are you afraid?" I sat down facing it and I carried on the
weirdest conversation I had ever had. Finally it asked me what I was doing
there and I said I had come there to “stop the world.” The coyote said,
“Que buenol" and then I realized that it was a bilingual coyote. The
nouns and verbs of its sentences were in English, but the conjunctions and
exclamations were in Spanish. The thought crossed tny mind that l was in
the presence of a Chicano coyote. I began to lattgh at the absurdity of
it all and I laughed so hard that I became almost hysterical. Then the
hill weight of the impossibility of what was happening struck me and tny
mind wobbled. The coyote stood up and our eyes met. I stared h‘xedly
into them. I lelt they were pulling tne and suddenly the animal became
iridescent; it began to glow. It was as if my mind were replaying the
memory of another event that had taken place ten years before, when under
the influence of peyote I witnessed the metamorphosis of an ordinary dog
into an unforgettable iridescent being. It was as though the coyote had
triggered the recollection, and the memory of that previous event was
summoned and became superimposed on the eoyote's shape; the coyote was a
fluid, liquid, luminous being. Its luminosity was dazzling. I wanted to
cover my eyes with my hands to protect them, but I could not move. The
luminous being touched me in some undefined part ol‘ myself and my body
experienced such an exquisite indescribable warmth and wellbeing that
it was as ifthe touch had made me explode. I became transfixed. I could
not feel my feet, or my legs, or any part of my body, yet something was
sustaining me erect.

I have no idea how long I stayed in that position. In the meantime, the
luminous coyote and the hilltop where I stood melted away. I had no thoughts
or feelings. Everything had been turned off and I was floating freely.

Suddenly I felt that my body had been struck and then it became enveloped
by something that kindled me. I became aware then that the sun was shining
on me. I could vaguely distinguish a distant range of mountains towards
the west. The sun was almost over the horizon. I was looking directly into
it and then I saw the “lines of the world.“ I actually perceived the
most extraordinary prof usion of fluorescent white lines which crisscrossed
everything around me. For a moment I thought that I was perhaps experiencing
sunlight as it was being refracted by my eyelashes. I blinked and looked
again. The lines were constant and were superimposed on or were coming
through everything in the surroundings. I turned around and examined an
extraordinarily new world. The lines were visible and steady even if I
looked away from the sun.

I stayed on the hilltop in a state of ecstasy for what appeared to be
an endless time, yet the whole event may have lasted only a new minutes,
perhaps only as long as the sun shone before it reached the horizon, but to
tne it seemed an endless time. I felt something warm and soothing oozing out
of the world and out of my own body. I knew I had discovered a secret. It
was so simple. I experienced an unknown flood of feelings. Never in my
lite had I had such a divine euphoria, such peace, such an encompassing
grasp, and yet I could not put the discovered secret into words, or even
into thoughts, but my body knew it.

Then I either fell asleep or I fainted. When I again became aware of
myselfI was lying on the rocks. I stood up. The world was as I had always
seen it. It was getting dark and I automatically started on my way back
to my car.
