---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 553
Tags:
  - Life-Love=Grace=Liberty
  - Combat-Action=Metanoia=Repentance, Renewal and Awakening
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - Sacrifice-Death=Sacrifice and Suffering=Contemptus Mundi
  - Discernment-Truth=Knowledge=The Knower and the Known
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=The Nature of Reality
  - Sacrifice-Death=Death=The Destruction of I-Consciousness
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Realization
By: Abu Sa'id ibn Abi ’l-Khayr
---
He was asked, 'When shall a man be freed from his wants?’ ‘When God
shall free him.’ he replied： ‘this is not affected by a man’s
exertion, but by the grace and help of God. First of all, He brings
forth in him the desire to attain this goal. Then He opens to him the
gate of repentance. Then He throws him into self-mortification, so
that he continues to strive and. for a while, to pride himself upon
his efforts, thinking that he is advancing or achieving something：
but afterwards he falls into despair and feels no joy. Then he knows
that his work is not pure, but tainted, he repents of the acts of
devotion which he had thought to be his own, and perceives that they
were done by God’s grace and help, and that he was guilty of
polytheism in attributing them to his own exertion. When this becomes
manifest, a feeling of joy enters his heart. Then God opens to him the
gate of certainty, so that for a time he takes anything from any one
and accepts contumely and endures abasement, and knows for certain by
Whom it is brought to pass, and doubt concerning this is removed from
his heart. Then God opens to him the gate of love, and here too egoism
shows itself for a time and he is exposed to blame, which means that
in his love of God he meets fearlessly whatever may befall him and
recks not of reproach; but still he thinks “I love" and finds no rest
until he perceives that it is God who loves him and keeps him in the
state of loving, and that this is the result of divine love and grace,
not of his own endeavour. Then God opens to him the gate of unity and
causes him to know that all action depends on God Almighty. Hereupon
he perceives that all is He, and all is by Him. and all is His ： that
He has laid this self-conceit upon His creatures in order to prove
them, and that He in His omnipotence ordains that they shall hold this
false belief, because omnipotence is His attribute, so that when they
regard His attributes they shall know that He is the Lord. What
formerly was hearsay now becomes known to him intuitively as he
contemplates the works of God. Then he entirely recognises that he has
not the right to say “F’jor “mine”. At this stage he beholds his
helplessness： desires fall away from him and he becomes free and
calm. He wishes that which God wishes： his own wishes are gone, he is
emancipated from his wants, and has gained peace and joy in both
worlds.'
