---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 91-92
  Source:
    Title: Ecstasy
    By: Marghanita Laski
By: Jacquetta Hawkes
Title: Man on Earth
---
\“One night when the land was still fresh from the rain, I was wandering
near our camp enjoying the moonlight when an immense exaltation took
possession of me. It was as though the White Goddess of the moon had
thrown some bewitching power into her rays, It seemed to me that our arid
satellite was itself a living presence bounding in the sky- I do not myself
understand this use of the word ‘bounding,’ but it comes insistently,
and I cannot but use it to express some deeply felt vitality. Indeed,
the whole night was dancing about me.

“It appeared that the moonlight had ceased to be a physical thing and
now represented a state of illumination in my own mind. As here in the
night landscape the steady white light threw every olive leafand pebble
into sharp relief, so it seemed that my thoughts and feelings had been
given an extraordinary clarity and truth.

"So powerfully was I moved by this sense of possession that I climbed up
on to a high outcrop of rock against the mouth of the wadi and knelt down
there. The moonlight swam round, and in, my head as I knelt looking across
the plain to the shining silver bar of the Mediterranean. “From far
behind me, still muffled in the folds ofthe mountain, I heard the bronze
sound of camel-bells. To my sharpened but converging senses they seemed
like a row of brown flowers blooming in the moonlight. In truth the sound
ofbells came from nothing more remarkable than a caravan, perhaps twenty
camels with packs and riders, coming down the wadi on its way northward
to Haifa. But even now I cannot recognise that caravan in such everyday
terms; my memory of it is dreamlike, yet embodies one of the most intense
sensuous and emotional experiences of my life. For those minutes, and I
have no notion how many they were, I had the heightened sensibility of
one passionately in love and with it the power to transmute all that the
senses perceived into symbols of burning significance. This surely is one
of the best rewards of humanity. To be filled with comprehension of the
beauty and marvellous complexity of the physical world, and for this happy
excitement ofthe senses to lead directly into an awareness of spiritual
significance. The fact that such experience comes most surely with love,
with possession by the creative eros, suggests that it belongs near the
root of our mystery. Certainly it grants man a state of mind in which I
believe he must come more and more to live： a mood of intensely conscious
individuality which serves only to strengthen an intense consciousness
of unity with all being. His mind is one infinitesimal node in the mind
present throughout all being, just as his body shares in the unity of matter.

“The bells came nearer and another sound mingled with theirs; a low,
monotonous chanting. I looked behind me for a moment and saw the dark
procession swaying out from behind the last bend in the wadi, then I turned
back so that the column should pass me and enter my world ofvision from
behind. I found myself comprehending every physical fact of their passage
as though it were a part of my own existence. I knew how the big soft feet
of the camels pressed down upon and embraced the rough stones of the path;
I knew the warm depth oftheir fur and the friction upon it ofleather harness
and the legs of the riders; I knew the blood flowing through the bodies
of men and beasts and thought of it as echoing the life of the anemones
which now showed black among the rocks around me. The sound of bells and
the chanting seemed rich and glowing as the stuff of the caravan itself.

“So the swaying line came from behind, went past, and moved away across
the plain. It was a procession of life moving through the icy moonlight. It
was coming from the mountain and going towards the sea. That was all I
knew, but as the moon leapt and bounded in the sky I took full possession
ofa love and confidence that have not yet forsaken me."
