---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 11 - ䷊ - T'ai
    Line: 1
    Page: 80-81
By: Salvador de Madariaga
---
Cortés must have felt by now that Narvaez was a poor match for him. He
had come all the way from Mexico while the newly arrived general, with his
fresh and still untried troops, remained enjoying the delights of Cempoal
for no reason other than his usual indolence and carelessness; he was well
informed about happenings in Narvaez’ camp from his own men who came and
went, as well as from the men of Narvaez who came and sometimes remained,
like one Villalobos who, with seven other soldiers, deserted to Cortés
as a protest against Ayllén’s imprisonment. In this state of mind,
he called Juan Velazquez de Lebn. “And as Cortes spoke sometimes very
honey-like, and with laughter in his mouth, he said to him half laughing：
I had you called because I am told by Andres de Duero that Narvaez says,
and it is a general rumour in this camp, that if you go there, I am done
with and destroyed, for they believe that you will go over to him; and so,
I have decided that, if you love me, you should go thither straightway on
your good dapple mare, with all your gold, and your Swaggerer ... and other
small trifles I will give you; and you will wear the Swaggerer round one
shoulder and arm, and round the other one another chain still heavier, and
you will see what Narva’ez wishes of you, and as soon as you come back,
I shall send Diego de Orda’s, whom they also wish to see in their camp.”

This scene, vividly recorded by Bernal Diaz, is of the purest Corte’s：
a flower of free, spontaneous, humorous and slightly swaggerish life grown
out of a root of coldly calculated caution. It was essential for him to
test the loyalty of these two captains, one-time leaders of the Velazquez
group, before the battle and not during battle. ... The shrewd generosity
of Cortes worked on Vela’zquez de Leon at once： he accepted to go,
but refused to take his gold with him. Corte’s gave him one of his
servants as an escort -- just in case.
