---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 466-467
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=The Terrestrial Paradise
By: Hermes
---
The pious will be deemed insane, and the impious wise： the madman
will be thought a brave man. and the wicked will be esteemed as good.
As to the soul, and the belief that it is immortal by nature, or may
hope to attain to immortality, as I have taught you—all this they will
mock at, and will even persuade themselves that it is false. No word
of reverence or piety, no utterance worthy of heaven and of the gods
of heaven, will be heard or believed.

And so the gods will depart from mankind, ... and only evil angels
will remain, who will mingle with men, and drive the poor wretches by
main force into all manner of reckless crime, into wars, and
robberies, and frauds, and all things hostile to the nature of the
soul.  Then will the earth no longer stand unshaken, and the sea will
bear no ships; heaven will not support the stars in their orbits, nor
will the stars pursue their constant course in heaven; all voices of
the gods will of necessity be silenced and dumb; the fruits of the
earth will rot; the soil will turn barren, and the very air will
sicken in sullen stagnation. After this manner will old age come upon
the world. Religion will be no more; all things will be disordered and
awry; all good will disappear.

But when all this has befallen, Asclepius, then the Master and Father,
God ... will look on that which has come to pass, and will stay the
disorder by the counterworking of his will, which is the good. He will
call back to the right path those who have gone astray; he will
cleanse the world from evil, now washing it away with waterfloods, now
burning it out with fiercest fire, or again expelling it by war and
pestilence. And thus he will bring back his world to its former
aspect, so that the Kosmos will once more be deemed worthy of worship
and wondering reverence, and God, the maker and restorer of the mighty
fabric, will be adored by the men of that day with unceasing hymns of
praise and blessing. Such is the new birth of the Kosmos; it is a
making again of all things good, a holy and awe-striking restoration
of all nature; and it is wrought in the process of time by the eternal
will of God.
