---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 331-332
  Source:
    Title: The Divine Mileu
By: Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
---
The problem of evil, that is to say the reconciling of our failures,
even the purely physical ones, with creative goodness and creative power,
will always remain one ofthe most disturbing mysteries ofthe universe for
both our hearts and our minds. A full understanding of the suffering of
God’s creatures (like that ofthe pains ofthe damned) presupposes in us
an appreciation ofthe nature and value of “participate being” which,
for lack of any point of comparison, we cannot have. Yet this much we
can see： on the one hand, the work which God has undertaken in uniting
Himself intimately to created beings presupposes in them a slow preparation
in the course of which they (who already exzs't, but are not yet complete)
cannot of their nature avoid the risks (aggravated by an original fault)
involved in the imperfect organisation of the multiple principle in them
and around them; and on the other hand, because the final victory of good
over evil can only be completed in the total organisation ofthe world,
our infinitely short individual lives cannot hope to benefit here below
from access to the Promised Land. We are like soldiers who fall during the
assault which leads to peace. God does not therefore suffer a preliminary
defeat in our defeat became, although we appear to succumb individually,
the world, in which we shall live again, triumphs in and through our deaths.

But this first aspect of His victory, which is enough to assure us of His
omnipotence, is completed by another manifestation -- possibly more direct
and in any case more immediately palpable for each of us -- of His universal
authority. In virtue of His very perfections, God cannot ordain that the
elements ofa world in the course of growth -- or at least ofa fallen world
in the process of rising again-should avoid shocks and diminishments,
even moral ones： necessarium est ut mandala evenz‘ant. But God will
make it good -- He will take His revenge, if one may use the expression --
by making evil itself serve the higher good of His faithful, the very
evil which the present state ofcreation does not allow Him to suppress
immediately. Like an artist making use ofa fault or an impurity in the
stone he is sculpting or the bronze he is casting so as to produce more
exquisite lines or a more beautiful tone, God, without sparing us the
partial deaths, nor the final death, which form an essential part of our
lives, transfigures them by integrating them in a better plan -- provided
we trust lovingly in Him. Not only our unavoidable ills but our faults,
even our most deliberate ones, can be embraced in that transformation,
provided always we repent of them. Not everything is immediately good to
those who seek God; but everything is capable of becoming good： omnia
convertuntur in barium.
