---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 29-32
  Source:
    Title: Letters tto Olga
    Locus:
      Date: June 19, 1982
By: Vaclav Havel
---
Dear Olga,

Again, I call to mind that distant moment in Hermanice when on a hot,
cloudless summer day, I sat on a pile of rusty iron and gazed into the crown
of an enormous tree that stretched, with dignified repose, up and over all
the fences, wires, bars and watchtowers that separated me from it. As I
watched the imperceptible trembling of its leaves against an endless sky,
I was overcome by a sensation that is difhcult to describe： all at once,
I seemed to rise above all the coordinates of my momentary existence in the
world into a kind of state outside time in which all the beautiful things
I had ever seen and experienced existed in a total “co-present”; I
felt a sense of reconciliation, indeed of an almost gentle consent to the
inevitable course of things as revealed to me now, and this combined with a
carefree determination to face what had to be faced. A profound amazement at
the sovereignty of Being became a dizzying sensation of tumbling endlessly
into the abyss of its mystery; an unbounded joy at being alive, at having
been given the chance to live through all I have lived through, and at the
fact that everything has a deep and obvious meaning -- this joy formed a
strange alliance in me with a vague hor- ror at the inapprehensibility and
unattainability ofeverything I was so close to in that moment, standing
at the very “edge of the finite"; I was flooded with a sense of ultimate
happiness and harmony with the world and myself, with that moment, with all
the moments I could call up, and with everything invisible that lies behind
it and which has meaning. I would even say that I was somehow “struck by
love,” though I don’t know precisely for whom or what. Once, in one of
my letters, I reflected upon this experience; now I think -- at least in
the perspective of these essays -- that I understand it better.

Evidently there exists an experience in which the longing of separated Being
for remerging with the integrity of Being is satisfied, as it were, in the most
mature and complete manner. That experience is typically and most profoundly
human： it is the experience of meaning, and of meaningfulness. The need for
meaning and the search for it -- regardless of their form, their strength or
their depth, or how definite or indefinite they may be, though they be nothing
more than a vague sensation of the absence of “something” without which
life is worthless -- accompany the human “I” from its beginning right
through to its end. They are inseparable and its most important dimension
(because it embraces all the rest), its maturest and most complete expression,
and the instrument of its self-constitution. Perhaps it could be said that the
“I” is, in fact, this search for meaning-the meaning of things, events,
its own life, itself. Certainly this dimension of its longing for “Being
in Being," or rather this aspect ofits thrownness into its source in Being,
is somehow the “last” to come to light： it is something more than just
the spontaneous intention of the “pre-I," in which there are still echoes
of the “prenatal" state of nonseparation; it is even something more than
the vigorous effort of the mind to grasp Being by perceiving and throwing
light on it; these intentions are, of course, present in the “I,” but
they do not explain it entirely： it transcends them-by virtue, for example,
of how it contains them within itself, mutually increases their strength and
consummates them： paradoxically, the “I” seeks fullness of participation,
but an alert participation, one that already knows ofitself,‘ it seeks a
totality of merging, but a totality -- so to speak -- that is fully aware of
its own unrealizability.

The experience of meaning is thus, essentially, the maturest or “highest"
form of the “I"’s quasi-identification with the integrity of Being. It
is the experience of genuine “contact,” but contact as something both
autonomous and integral-para(loxical as that may be. Perhaps it might be
described as the experience of “counterpoint” between the “voice of
Being” in the “I” (in its source) and the “voice of Being" in the
“non-I” (in the world), wherein the meaning of this counterpoint does
not just lie in a harmony that amplifies the original quality, but in the
new quality it brings, a quality that knows neither of the two intersecting
voices. It is in this counterpoint that it first seems possible (if only for
a fleeting moment) to hear a suggestion or an echo of the as yet unfamiliar
theme from the symphony of Being. The semipresence of Being in the “I”
and its hidden presence in the “non-I” encounter each other here for
an instant as “insight,” a joyous sensation of participation and the
vertigo that comes with it. The reflection of Being in the “I” renders
us open to the mystery of Being in the “non-I”; Being concealed in the
world, or the Being of the world, opens itselfup to us. It is a meeting of
two opennesses -- but opennesses that are directed exclusively toward each
other： it is not just that we seem to be here because of Being, but that
Being seems to be here because of us. The greatest attainable closeness,
fullness and completeness of Being would therefore seem to call forth the
greatest degree of fullness and completeness of the “I.”

Perhaps it will now be clear why I link the experience of meaning with
what I called the third paradox ofour thrownnesses： the nearest we can
come to the fullness of Being also gives us the clearest indication of how
unattainable it is; the most mature identification is most powerfully revealed
as quasi-identification. Joy has an undertone of horror, tranquillity of
anxiety, good fortune a touch of the fatally tragic. This experience reveals
to us that in complete and unlimited identification, total insight, utter
happiness, lies the end of the “1,” death. It is by no means accidental
that at the very heights of meaningfulness, happiness, joy and love, the
specter of death inevitably appears with particular clarity. The experience
of meaning also differs from less mature expressions of our longing for Being
in that it contains within it-- while at the same time, oddly enough, losing
nothing of that sense of supreme happiness -- the most forceful awareness
of futility. But is it not precisely this that brings it closest to the
contradictory essence itself of human life and the human mission?

Being spellbound within me and Being spellbound within the world can join
hands anytime, anywhere and in any way： when I look into the crown of a
tree or into someone’s eyes, when I succeed in writing you a good letter,
when I am moved by an opera on television, when a passage from Levinas sets
my thoughts swirling, when our visits work out, when I understand the meaning
of my compassion for the weatherwoman, when I help someone or when someone
helps me, when something important happens, or when nothing in particular
happens at all. But whenever and however it happens, such moments tend to
be rare and fleeting. Given the contradictory nature of separated Being, it
can’t be any other way and it is right that it should be so： after all,
the uniqueness and the unpredictability of sud] moments combine to create
their meaning： it is the meaning of “islands of meaning" in the ocean
ofour struggling, the meaning oflanterns whose light is cast into the darkness
ofour life's journey, illuminating all the many meanings of its direction.

I kiss you,

Vasek
