---
Format: verse
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 933-934
  Source:
    Locus: XI 15,17-20,38-42,46
    Title: "Bhagavad-Git\xE2"
Tags:
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Universal Man
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=The One and the Many
  - "Discernment-Truth=Reality=San\xE2tana Dharma"
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=Omniscience
    and Omnipresence
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Supernal
    Sun
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=The Nature of Reality
  - Combat-Action=Judgement=The Fear of God
  - Discernment-Truth=Knowledge=The Knower and the Known
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=The Sphere of the Moon
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=The Sundoor
  - Combat-Action=Orthodoxy-Ritual-Method=The Spiritual Master
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Know Thyself
---
O God! in Thy body 1 see all the gods, as well as multitudes of all kinds
 of beings; the Lord Brahmâ, seated on the lotus throne, all the Rishis and
 all the celestial serpents.

 ...

I see Thee with diadems, maces, discus, shiningly effulgent everywhere,
 blazing all around like the burning fire and the sun, dazzling to the sight
 and immeasurable.
Thou art the Imperishable, the Supreme, the One to be known. Thou art the
 Supreme Refuge of this universe; Thou art the ever unchanging Guardian of
 the Eternal Dharma; Thou art, I know, the Ancient Being.
I see Thee without beginning, middle or end, with infinite power, with
 numberless arms, the sun and moon as Thine eyes, Thy mouth as the blazing
 fire, heating this universe with Thine own radiance.
By Thee alone the space between heaven and earth and all the quarters is
 pervaded. O Great Soul, seeing this, Thy wonderful and terrifying Form,
 the three worlds are stricken with fear.

 ...

O boundless Form, Thou art the Primeval Deity, the Ancient Being, Thou art
 the Supreme Refuge of this universe; Thou art the Knower, the One to be
 known and the Supreme Abode. By Thee alone is this universe pervaded.
Thou art Vâyu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, the Moon; Thou art the Lord of creatures
 and the great Grandsire. Salutations to Thee, my salutations a thousand times,
 again and again my salutations to Thee!
Salutations to Thee before, salutations to Thee behind, salutations to
 Thee on all sides! O All, infinite in power, and immeasurable in valor,
 Thou pervadest all, therefore Thou art All.
Not knowing this Thy glory and regarding Thee merely as a friend, whatever
 I may have said presumptuously, out of either carelessness or fondness,
 addressing Thee as 'O Krishna,' 'O Yâdava,' 'O Friend';
O Changless One, in whatever manner I may have been disrespectful to Thee,
 in jesting, in walking, in reposing, sitting, or at meals, alone, or in the
 presence of others; O Unfathomable One, I implore Thee to forgive all that.

 ...

I desire to see Thee as before, with diadem, mace and discus. O Universal
 Form of thousand arms, do Thou manifest Thyself in that same Four-armed Form
 (form of Vishnu).
