---
Source:
  ID: 0a254615-569b-4fb3-96ef-69bd8a224d0d
Format: Verse
By: 0200c883-e38f-4554-92bc-2eba913426b7
Title: Childhood Friends
Description: September 26-29
---
A close childhood friend came once to visit Joseph.
They had shared all the secrets that children
tell each other when they are lying on their pillows
at night before they go to sleep. These two
were completely truthful with each other.

The friend asked, What was it like when you realized
that your brothers were jealous and what they planned to do?
I felt like a lion with a chain around his neck,
not degraded by the chain, and not complaining,
just waiting for my power to be recognized.

How about down in the well, and in prison,
how was it then? Like the moon when it is
getting smaller, yet knowing the fullness to come.
Like a seed pearl ground in the mortor for medicine
that knows it will now be the light in a human eye.

Like a wheat grain that breaks open in the ground,
then grows and gets harvested, then crushed
in the mill for flour, baked and then crushed again
between teeth to become a person's understanding.

Lost in love, like the songs the planters sing
the night after they sow the seed.

Then Joseph began questioning his friend,
What have you brought me? You know a traveler
should not arrive empty-handed at the door
of a friend like me. That is like going
to the grinding stone without your wheat.

God will ask at the resurrection, Did you bring me
a present? Did you think you wouldn't see me?

Joseph keeps teasing, Let's have it.
I want my gift.

The guest began, You cannot imagine
how I have looked for something for you.
Nothing seemed appropriate. You don't take gold
down into a goldmine, or a drop of water
to the Sea of Oman. Everything I thought of
was like bringing cumin seed to Kirmanshah
where cumin comes from. You have all seeds
in your barn. You even have my love
and my soul, so I cannot bring those.

I have brought you a mirror.
Look at yourself and remember me.

He took the mirror from his robe
where he was hiding it.

What is the mirror of being? Non-being?

Always bring a mirror of non-existence as a gift.
Any other present is foolish.

Let the poor man look deep into generosity.
Let bread see a hungry man.
Let kindling behold a spark from the flint.

An empty mirror and your worst destructive habits,
when they are held up to each other, that is when
the real making begins. That's when art and crafting are.

A tailor needs a torn garment to practice his expertise.
The trunks of trees must be cut and cut again,
so they can be used for fine carpentry.
Your doctor must have a broken leg to doctor.
Your defects are the ways that glory gets manifested.

Whoever sees clearly what is diseased in himself
begins to gallop on the way. There is nothing worse
than thinking you are well enough. More than anything,
self-complacency blocks the workmanship.

Put your vileness up to a mirror and weep.
Get that self-satisfaction flowing out of you.

Satan thought, I am better than Adam,
and that better than is still strongly in us.

Your streamwater may look clean,
but there is unstirred matter on the bottom.

Your guide can dig a side channel
that will drain that waste off.

Trust your wound to a teacher's surgery.
Flies collect on a wound. They cover it,
those flies of your self-protecting feelings,
your love for what you think is yours.

Let a teacher wave away the flies
and put a plaster on your wound.

Don't turn your head. Keep looking
at the bandaged place.

That is where the light enters you.
And don't believe for a moment
you are healing yourself.
