---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 82-89
  Source:
    Title: The Golden String
By: Bede Griffiths
References:
  - Title: 1 John
    Locus:
      Chapter: 4
      Verse: 10
  - Title: Psalm
    Locus:
      Chapter: 119
  - Title: 1 John
    Locus:
      Chapter: 2
      Verse: 15-17
  - ID: 648e8fce-40db-4d65-a024-7747a068a93f
---
I returned home with the intention of preparing myself for taking orders in
the Church of England and I was advised to go and stay at the Oxford Mission
in Bethnal Green to get some practical experience of work in the slums. This
decision cost me more than any previous decision of my life. I had still
deeply ingrained in me my prejudice against any form of ecclesiasticism and
especially of the clerical life, but I realised that it was the test of my
faith, ifI really believed in the Church, to submit myself to its discipline,
and the idea of work in the East End of London appealed to me. To my mother
this was the cause of the greatest joy. She had always had a special affection
for me, which I had returned at first quite spontaneously, taking pleasure
in helping her in the house and confiding all my ambitions to her. Now that
I had begun to think as a Christian, this bond was strengthened not only by
my own feelings of the duty and love which were due to her, but also by our
common feeling for religion. I used always to go to Communion with her and
the thought of my taking orders was her highest ambition for me.

No doubt, this had a considerable effect on my decision to settle in the
Church of England, but I was not allowed to rest long in this state of mind.
I read some of Archbishop Laud’s writings, in particular his controversy
with Fisher, the Jesuit, and on the whole I think I considered that he had
the best of the argument. I also learned more of the sacramental doctrine
of the Church and of the idea of the Real Presence, though I never found
anything more satisfactory than I had learned from Hooker. I also studied
Bishop Butler’s Analogy of Religion, which made a deep impression on me,
and I was much taken with the mystical works of William Law. This was, I
think, the first time that I encountered any mystical doctrine, and it had a
powerful effect on me. Law was a discipline of the German mystic Jacob Boehme,
and brought into the Church of England a current of mystical teaching which,
though not precisely orthodox, was of great power and beauty, and saved the
Church in the eighteenth century from succumbing to the universal spirit of
rationalism. Though Bishop Butler’s sane rationalism appealed to me, Law
answered to a deeper need of my soul, of which I was now becoming conscious.

I had continued at home to keep up the practice of saying Morning and
Evening Prayer every day and I tried to live as strict and regular a life as
possible. But I found that the difficulty of adjusting myselfto the normal
round oflife was immense. I had a strong inclination now to fasting. I found
that when I fasted my brain became clear and my prayer gained in fervour and
intensity, but the moment I relaxed everything began to fall away from me.
My mother did not interfere, but many of my friends tried to dissuade me
from it, and it became a constant burden to me. I felt that if I abandoned
it, I was giving up all my hard-won faith, while ifI continued I felt myself
becoming more and more isolated from other people. I found in William Law and
the High Church tradition for which he stood a justification for my practice
and this encouraged me to continue, but it caused an almost intolerable
conflict. My reason counselled me often to give way, especially as I began
to grow incredibly thin and weak, but at the same time I felt a constant
renewal of spiritual power and a deep longing for prayer which increased
from day to day.

Often I would take long bicycle rides of sixty or eighty miles, as I still
refused to go anywhere by train, and in the course of these rides I went
through astounding experiences. I would usually stop for some bread and cheese
and beer at midday, but otherwise I tried to do without food. Towards the end
of the day, however, I often found myselfgetting tired out and would be tempted
to stop and take some tea. This would often raise an appalling conflict in my
mind between reason and common sense on the one hand, the spirit of prayer
and faith on the other hand： but I found that ifI resisted the temptation
it often brought with it a renewal of strength, both physical and spiritual,
which seemed almost miraculous. Thus I was strengthened in my determination
to continue.

I fthe conflict at home in the country was considerable, when I came to
London and settled at Bethnal Green, it became intolerable. I now felt the
full weight of that world which I had rejected pressing upon me. The life of
prayer and austerity which I had been leading had increased my sensibility
to an extreme degree, and I felt the presence of the surrounding world as
a violent oppression. It was not simply a matter of sensibility. The life
around Bethnal Green among the poor and in the open market attracted me;
I felt that here was the human world which I loved; and the vegetables
displayed in the stalls in the market made me feel the contact with the
earth and the country. But my mind had grown so deeply antagonistic to the
whole civilisation for which London stood that it filled me with horror. I
felt it as a giant force opposed to all that I loved, ceaselessly beating
against the doors of my mind, breaking down my resistance and driving out
the spirit of prayer. I had read with deep conviction when I was at home the
words of St. John： “Love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world. Ifany man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world. And the world passeth
away with the lust thereof, but he that doeth the will ofGod abideth for
ever." These words had sunk into my soul, and now I felt this “world”
around me, the world of time and flux and change and sensation, and I knew
that it was at war with the world of that eternal order in which I believed.

I went to St. Paul’s Cathedral and Westminster Abbey, the British Museum and
the National Gallery, to try to recover my sense of these eternal values, but
nothing could give me any peace. I attended services also at Anglo-Catholic
churches, and there I felt some sense of continuity with the past, but it
was like a small island in a flood： the deep unrest in my soul remained. At
last this sense of unrest came to a head. I had bought a book of Bishop Ken,
one of the “non-juring” bishops of the seventeenth century who stood for
the pure tradition of the Church of England, and in it I read some words
about the need for repentance. Up to this time my religion had been to
some extent external. I had engaged my mind and imagination, my feel --
ings and my will, but it had never really touched my heart. Behind all my
fervour and enthusiasm there had been an intense egoism. I acknowledged no
real authority over myself. My religion was based on my own reason and my
own will, and though I had come theoretically to accept the authority of
the Church, it had no real effect on me.

Now for the first time I felt an overwhelming need to repent. I did not
clearly understand what repentance was, nor was I aware of any particular
sin of which I had to repent. It was simply that the unrest in my soul had
turned from discontent with the world to a feeling ofdiscontent with myself.
There was nothing conscious or deliberate about it; it came to me as a
command, and I kept saying to myself, scarcely knowing the meaning of what I
said： “I must repent, I must repent." I went up in this state of mind to
a small chapel at the top of the house one evening, and there, as I prayed,
a resolution formed itself in my mind that I would not go to bed that night
but would spend the whole night in prayer. Again the resolution seemed not
to come from my own volition; it was an instinct with the force of a command.

I went, therefore, to my room and began to pray kneeling on the floor beside
the bed, and immediately a furious conflict started in my mind. Reason and
common sense told me that it was absurd to behave in this way. Beneath my
unconventional behaviour, in many ways I was still deeply conventional, and
I dreaded what people might think of me. Although I affected to despise the
world, I was in fact still governed by its standards, and the idea ofstaying
up all night in prayer appeared to me utterly absurd. I was also frightened
of the isolation into which I felt that I was being driven. I had no real
contact with anyone in London, and the people with whom I was staying,
though good and kind, would have had no understanding of the conflict in my
mind. I felt myself to be utterly alone in this vast city and I could find
no human justification for what I was doing.

However, these were comparatively external considerations; what really
terrified me was the conflict with my own reason. Until this time my reason
and instinct had always gone hand in hand. My first experience of the beauty
and mystery of nature had been confirmed by my reading of the poets and then
of the philosophers. My discovery ofChristianity had also gone on rational
lines; at each stage I had seemed to find the book which I needed to satisfy
both my reason and my instinct for beauty and holiness. Even my prayer had
been perfectly rational and had been satisfied by the ordered beauty of
the Book of Common Prayer, but now something irrational seemed to be coming
into my life. There had been the desire for fasting which, though I might
justify it by reason to some extent, came upon me as an irrational impulse;
and now this call to repentance had come, as an apparently irrational urge,
and my reason rose up against it. Which was I to obey, this obscure instinct,
this apparently irrational urge, or my reason and common sense? The conflict
was the most intense that I had ever endured, and it was part of the terms
of the conflict, that it could not be answered by reason, because it was
precisely the place of reason in my life which was in question.

The conflict went deeper than I could possibly understand. I had lived up
till now by my own will. I had worked out my own philosophy and religion
for myself and without knowing it I had made a God of my own reason. I had
made myself the judge of everything in heaven and earth, and I acknowledged
no power or authority over me. Even if theoretically I now acknowledged the
authority of God and the Church, in practice I was still the ruler and the
judge. I was the centre of my own existence, and my isolation from the rest
of the world was due to the fact that I had deliberately shut myselfup within
the barriers of my own will and reason. Now I was being summoned to surrender
this independence. Something had arisen in the depths of my own nature which
my reason was powerless to control. I was being called to surrender the very
citadel of my self. I was completely in the dark. I did not really know what
repentance was or what I was required to repent of. It was this darkness
which really made me afraid. Is not this the one thing of which we are all
afraid? The darkness which is outside the sphere ofour consciousness, the
abyss where all known landmarks fail? This was what I was really facing and
it was this which filled me with such unspeakable horror. I do not wish to
exaggerate the nature of this ordeal, but it was indeed the turning point of
my life. The struggle went on for many hours, but I realised at length that
it was my reason which I had to renounce. My reason was the serpent which
was threatening to devour my life. It was not merely the reason of convention
and common sense, but the very autonomy of my reason which I was required to
sacrifice. I had to surrender myself into the hands of a power which was above
my reason, which would not allow me to argue, but commanded me to obey. Yet
this power presented itself as nothing but darkness, as an utter blank.

In this state of mind I had but one resource. I had never been in the habit
of meditating on the passion of Christ, but the scene in the Garden of
Gethsemane had impressed itself on my imagination. I had always felt that in
those hours Christ had faced the utter darkness of death and dereliction, the
full tide of the power of evil sweeping over the world. Now I felt that this
hour had come upon me, and I could only place myself beside him in the Garden
of Gethsemane and wait for the night to pass. Once I had made up my mind not
to listen to reason, the conflict ceased. It was only a matter of enduring to
the end. So I set myself to remain kneeling on the floor, fighting against
sleep and keeping my mind fixed on the figure of Christ. Somehow I managed
to endure until it was morning. When I rose, I felt worn out and hopeless;
I did not know what was to become of me. I did not feel that I could stay
where I was and nothing else offered itself to me.

But as I was leaving my room, I suddenly heard a voice say： “You must
go to a retreat.” When I say that I heard a voice, I do not mean that I
heard any sound. It was simply that this was signified to me interiorly,
but in such a way that it did not appear to come from myself. I believe
that I had heard the word “retreat” used once, but I am certain that
I did not know what it meant. I associated it, I think, with some kind of
clerical conference which I had heard of taking place in the country. The
message came to me as a direct inspiration, though I did not know what it
signified. I went, therefore, to an Anglo-Catholic church nearby and asked
the priest ifthere was such a thing as a retreat to which I could go. He
thought for a minute and then said： “Yes, there is one beginning this
morning at Westminster House.” The retreat was for a group ofordinands,
but he thought that it would be possible for me to attend it. I went round
to Westminster House, which I found to be a house of the Cowley Fathers.

It is difficult to describe what happened when I reached there. The retreat
conferences were given by an old priest called Father Tovey. They were very
simple in character and dealt with the fundamental doctrines of Original
Sin and Redemption, of the Incarnation and the Holy Trinity. This was the
first time that I had ever heard these doctrines expounded in a way which
had any meaning to me. He based himself on St. Thomas, which I recognised
with pleasure, but he gave them a living personal application which touched
my heart. I had studied philosophy and theology, and I knew the elements of
church history and church doctrine, but the simple truth of the faith had
never before been set before me. Now it penetrated my soul in such a way
that I was appalled to think that I had never understood it before. I had
rejected the Church and gone my own way, working out my religion for myself,
and here all the time the truth had been among the people I had despised. My
whole life seemed to have been one gigantic mistake. I had turned my back
on the truth, and sought it blindly in the opposite direction, and now I
had been forced back to the point from which I started.

The repentance for which I had blindly asked the night before now came over me
like a flood. I went to confession for the first time in my life and tears
poured from my eyes, tears of a kind which I had never known before. My
whole being seemed to be renewed. When I went into the church and heard the
chanting of the Psalms, it seemed that the words were being spoken in the
depths of my own soul and were the utterances of my own prayer. They were
chanting the 119th Psalm; it must have been in plain-chant,
 though I did not know it, and no doubt this must have stirred my soul,
for there is no music on earth like it; but it was the words which engraved
themselves on my mind：

Blessed are those that are undefiled in the way： and walk in the law of
the Lord.

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies and seek him with their whole
heart. ...

With my whole heart have I sought thee： 0 let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments. ...

Open thou my eyes that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.

I had come through the darkness into a world of light. That eternal truth
and beauty which the sights and sounds of London threatened to banish
from my sight was here the universal law. I heard its voice sounding in
my ears. The very stones of the house seemed to be the living stones of a
temple in which this song ascended. It was as though I had bee-n given a new
power of vision. Everything seemed to lose its hardness and rigidity and to
become alive. When I looked at the crucifix on the wall, the figure on it
seemed to be a living person; I felt that I was in the house of God. When I
went outside I found that the world about me no longer oppressed me as it
had done. The hard casing of exterior reality seemed to have been broken
through, and everything disclosed its inner being. The buses in the street
seemed to have lost their solidity and to be glowing with light. I hardly
felt the ground as I trod, and I think that I must have been in some danger
of being run over. I was like a bird which has broken the shell of its egg
and finds itself in a new world; like a child who has forced its way out of
the womb and sees the light of day for the first time.

When I returned to the house I went to my room and took up the New
Testament. There I read the words of St. John： “Not that we loved God,
but that He loved us," and suddenly the meaning of what had happened dawned
on my mind. Through all these years I had thought that I had been seeking
God. The presence which had appeared to me beneath the forms of nature that
day at school; the beauty which I had found in the poets; the truth which
philosophy had opened to me; and finally the revelation of Christianity;
all these had seemed to be steps on my way of ascent towards God. Now I
sudv denly saw that all the time it was not I who had been seeking God,
but God who had been seeking me. I had made mysell‘the centre of my own
existence and had my back turned to God. All the beauty and truth which I
had discovered had come to me as a reflection ol‘his beauty, but I had
kept my eyes fixed on the reflection and was always looking at myself. But
God had brought me to the point at which I was compelled to turn away from
the reflection, both of myself and of the world which could only mirror my own
image. During that night the mirror had been broken, and I had felt abandoned
because I could no longer gaze upon the image of my own reason and the finite
world which it knew. God had brought me to my knees and made me acknowledge
my own nothingness, and out of that knowledge I had been reborn. I was no
longer the centre of my life and therefore I could see God in everything.

That night before I went to bed I opened a book by St. Iohn of the Cross and
read in it the words： “I will lead thee by a way thou knowest not to
the secret chamber of love." The words struck home to me as though they had
been spoken to me. Though I had never been without affection for my family
and had had many friends, yet I had never till this moment really known the
meaning of love. My strongest feelings had gone into my love for nature and
for poetry. Yet always I had had the feeling that in love the secret oflife
was to be found. And now I felt that love take possession of my soul. It was
as though a wave oflove flowed over me, a love as real and personal as any
human love could be, and yet infinitely transcending all human limitations.
It invaded my being and seemed to fill not only my soul but also my body.
My body seemed to dissolve, as things about me had done, and felt light and
buoyant. When I lay down I felt as though I might float on the bed, and I
experienced such rapture that I could imagine no ecstasy of love beyond it.

During the retreat Father Tovey had compared the action of grace to a
small child standing over an open trapdoor into a cellar where his father
is standing. The cellar is in darkness and the child can see nothing. But
he knows that his father is there, and his father tells him to jump. That
is what had happened to me; I had jumped into the darkness, and I had been
caught in the arms of love.
