---
By: Paul Brunton
References:
  - ID: 86dfa73a-ccfb-4e46-b7f9-0031c2a29177
  - Title: Srimad Bhagavata
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Locus:
    Page: 66-67
  Source:
    Title: The Spiritual Crisis of Man
  Title: God in All Worlds
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
---
The real essence of personality is the divine soul. Because this soul
continually exists in a state of unbroken happiness. Because even if we
find all that we want physically and intellectually, we would still remain
discontented, still go on with the search for happiness, for the single
reason that we had not yet found the soul itself. Because we unconsciously and
indirectly know this and therefore always hope on and hold on clinging to life
despite all the sufferings and struggles that it brings us. Because whenever
we observe how innumerable are the creatures, whether human or animal,
who cling desperately to life even under the most horrible conditions,
we observe also evidence of a subconscious recognition that the earthly
incarnation possesses a value, purpose, and meaning beyond its immediate ones.

How little, at this immature stage of seeking amid externals, do men know
that the treasures of bliss, satisfaction, and possession are really all in
themselves! The feeling of being incomplete, unfinished, and imperfect harasses
them; much of their unrest arises from it. But although they may experiment
with various means of assuaging it, although they may seek satisfaction
on different paths, they cannot overcome it except by taking to the final
quest. Although they think they are seeking happiness through the physical
body, they are in fact seeking it through the spiritual mind. This is so
and must be so because of the constitution of their own nature. This is why
no sooner is one desire satisfied than another arises to replace it. Thus,
every thirst of the inebriate for further drink is really a thirst, at a
physical and lower level ofdevelopment, for the Overselfs bliss. All men
are engaged in this search for the second self but most men are engaged
quite unconsciously. They are seeking its stable satisfaction in different
transient ways. How few comprehend that their need of the divine selfis a
permanent one! Most want to enjoy life in their way, which often is entirely
dependent on external things or on other persons, not in the philosophic way,
which, whilst including these things or persons, is yet inwardly independent
of them. All troubling desires fall away and unchanging emotional rest is
attained only when the goal is attained.

The serene happiness of the soul can never be broken by the anguish and
misery ofits shadow the person. No grief or passion, no fear or pain can
get into it. That part of his being which always remains in heaven, is
the Overself. That part which descends to suffer and struggle on earth,
is the personality. The two are indissolubly linked, although ignorance
sees only the person. This separation in consciousness from the Overselfis
the fundamental, ifhidden, cause of man's perennial search for happiness,
now in one thing or through one person and then in or through another. But
a happiness unhindered by some accompanying or subsequent sorrow, he never
finds. How could he, ifit does not exist in anything or anyone outside? His
longing will never be satisfied until it is diverted to, and satisfied
by, the transcendental Overself. All through his successive appearances in
different bodies, he is seeking the wholeness, the benign happiness, and the
blessed fulfilment of union with his higher nature. When he discovers and
finally accepts that earthly things are transient and contradictory, that
the pleasurable are tied to the painful, and thereupon makes this search a
conscious one, he is said to have entered on the Quest.

All forms of life in this world, being finite and limited, involve suffering.
But life in the heavenly world, which is not a distant place but an inner
state, which is findable even before death, is gloriously free and therefore
without suffering. The six things mentioned on the opening page of this
chapter, always desired but never found on earth, are so elusive precisely
because they belong to heaven. But heaven is a state ofmind. It is indeed
mind in its own purest being. Therefore, man may yet attain them here and
now so long as he searches for them in the region of thought and feeling
and does not limit himselfto the region of flesh and blood. "The cause
of happiness or misery is no other than one's self," it is an idea of the
mind," teaches Krishna, the divine messenger, in another ancient Indian text,
the Srimad Bhagavata.
