---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 505
Tags:
  - Life-Love=Faith=Trust in God
  - 542
  - Sacrifice-Death=Sacrifice and Suffering
  - 663
By: Tauler
---
Think what it implies to have so little confidence in that God who is
able to do all things, when ye are striving, and toiling, and wearing
yourselves out with anxiety, as if you meant to live for ever. All
this comes from that evil principle of covetousness. ... St Peter
says： ‘Cast all your care upon God, for He careth for you’ (I. Pet.
V. 7). This carefulness concerning outward things works a man three
great injuries. It blinds his reason and good sense; it quenches the
fire of love, and destroys all its fervour and heat; and it blocks up
the ways of secret access to God. It is like a noxious vapour, or
thick smoke, that rises up and chokes a man’s breathi. ... Not that we
should tempt God; for it is our duty to exercise a reasonable prudence
in providing such things as are right, to the supply of our
necessities and those of others, and profitable to ourselves and the
community, and to see that everything be done in a discreet and seemly
manner. But that which is your end when you sit and meditate in the
church, should be likewise your end when you are busied in all the
affairs of daily life. ...

Now some may ask, how we can say that God forsakes none that trust
Him, seeing that He often permits good men to suffer great poverty and
affliction. This He does, as Bishop Albert says, for three causes：
the first, that He may try them, and see whether they utterly believe
and trust Him; thus God often suffers men to be brought into distress
that He may teach them submission, and then succours them that they
may perceive His hand and His friendship and help; in order that their
love and gratitude may increase from that time forth, and they may
draw closer to God and become dearer to Him. Or again, God will by
these troubles shorten their purification hereafter; or again, He
sends them distress for a judgment on those who might relieve them and
do it not. Therefore, children, seek first the Kingdom of God, which
is God Himself, and nought else.
