---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 287-289
  Source:
    Title: States of Grace
By: Charlene Spretnak
---
In the contemporary renaissance of Goddess spirituality, women have formed
ritual groups in order to mark passages in their lives, to affirm their
emotional and other mind/body experiences, to heal and to celebrate,
to explore new possibilities of being, to empower their efforts and
desires, to renew commitment to ongoing social-change work, to enrich their
spiritual lives, and to strengthen bonds of communion in this fragmented,
atomized society. At times these rituals are wrenching, raucous, or sweetly
rapturous. In my own life I have participated in many rituals over the years
with a rather fluid configuration of sisterly ritualists： an intimate
group of four, a larger group ofa dozen or so, and a full tribal gathering
of both sexes who assemble irregularly for solstice, equinox, wedding,
and funeral rituals that include a multiplicity of friends and relations.

Although it is impossible to convey the experience of ritual on the printed
page, I offer brief accounts of two ceremonies that may serve as examples
of affirming the female dimension of being even in the midst of diffuse
cultural mechanisms that degrade it. The first is a menarche ritual, the
second a bride’s prenuptial ritual. (This selection is not intended to
slight other rites of passage; I look forward to attending lots of truly
great menopause rituals in the future!)

Some months after the daughters of two of us had their first menstrual
periods, seven women plus the two adolescents spend a weekend at a
hexagon-shaped house in the country with an open deck in the center. On
Saturday afternoon the mothers prepare an altar in the womblike round
enclosure, a cloth on which they set red candles and a pot of big red
Gerber daisies, along with Goddess figurines, pine cones, an abalone shell
filled with dried cypress needles, and other favorite objects that people
had brought. The group silently drifts toward the circle from various
doors and is seated on cushions. We listen as the order of the ceremony
is explained. We begin by lighting the dried needles and passing the shell
around the circle, breathing in the purifying smoke and fanning it gently
to surround each body. We invoke the presence of the four directions and
sing a melodic chant： We all comefrom the Goddess and to Her we shall
return like a drop of rain flowing to the ocean. We tell the girls about
some of the many, many cultural responses to menses as a visitation of
transformative power, a sacred time set apart from the mundane. We tell them
of the cultural degradation of women’s procreative power to potential
danger and then shameful uncleanliness. We tell them of the invention of
counting, the Paleolithic bone-calendars etched with twenty-eight marks,
the cycle of women’s blood and the moon. We read them a poetic myth
of Hera, goddess of women and the powers offecundity, who draws forth
the lunar blood. We sing again： She changes everything She touches,
and everything She touches changes. Then, one by one, the women tell the
story of their menarche, that first visitation of Hera -- the excitement,
the embarrassment, the confusion, the family’s response. After each
story, the speaker receives a crescent moon painted with berry juice on
her forehead. Some women also speak of their first sexual experiences,
of how they hope the girls might think about their bodies and their
womanhood. The girls tell their stories last, tales of red blood on white
slacks during the middle of movies! The circle is filled with laughter
and tears, blessings and hope. We sing a final song, Listen, listen,
11.5.1672 to my heart)" song. ... Then the women stand and form a birth
canal, an archway with our upraised arms. The two mothers stand at the
far end of the passageway, near the opening of the deck into the outer
world. One at a time the girls pass through our arch ofarms as we chant
their names and kiss their cheeks. As they emerge as women, the mothers
paint a crimson moon on their foreheads and hug them. Then come gifts
and feasting. That was my daughter’s menarche ritual.

When two women in our group married in recent years, we created a
prenuptial ritual that draws on the ancient association of women and
water. In pre-Olympian mythology, the goddess Hera returned each year
for her ritual bath of renewal at the spring called Kanathos, just as
the goddess Aphrodite returned to the sea at Paphos. They renewed their
sense of virginity, which originally meant one-in-herself, independent,
and selfdirected. In our ritual the women form a circle, seated around
a low table that has been transformed into a visual feast with flowers,
candles, Goddess figurines, shells, and other favorite objects. We begin
by invoking the presence of the four directions and passing a large shell
containing smoldering sage sprigs for purification. We ask the blessing of
the waters that love might flow, the blessing of fire that passion might
burn, the blessing of the air to cleanse a new beginning, and the blessing
of earth that the lovers might stay grounded and sure. We sing a chant of
the Goddess’s names： 1525', Astarte, Diana, Hecate, Demeter, Kali,
Inanna. We invoke the spirit of Hera and Aphrodite. Each woman offers a
blessing for the bride, the union, and her new state of being. We close
our eyes as one of us leads us on an inner journey of transformation in
which one’s old identity, as old clothes, is sloughed off on the bank of
a stream one crosses to enter a bower of eros. Someone reads from the myth
of Aphrodite about her return to Paphos for her sacred bath of renewal：
“There She was attended by Her Graces： Flowering, Growth, Beauty, ]oy,
and Radiance. They crowned Her with myrtle and lay a path ofrose petals
at Herfeet. ... ” Then we crown the bride with laurels and lay a path
of rose petals before her as, humming a chant, we lead her to the grotto,
that is, the transformed bathroom, filled with a profusion of flowers,
numerous candles, and fragrant incense. Her warm bath of water and scented
oils is sprinkled with petals, and she is left alone to immerse as gently
lilting music plays. When she rejoins us, the bride reclines and we encircle
her, massaging oil into her warm, soft body while we take turns reading
favorite poems of eros softly near her ear, poems of opening one’s heart
and mind and body to the beloved. Then we dress the bride in our gift,
an extravagantly beautiful sleeping gown. With still more blessings and
radiance, we break the circle. We eat voluptuous fruits and cake.

I was given that ritual before my remarriage. The following day, still
enveloped with the glow of grace and transformation, I thought back to the
bridal showers I had attended during my college years and just after：
ladies in cheery frocks playing parlor games, partaking of tea and cake,
chatting of just about anything on the eve of a marriage except the
elemental bounteousness of the female, skimming on the surface of our lives.
