---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Source:
    ID: ce3f70aa-4448-4cfd-a1b7-4a32eb5e8df0
    Title: I Ching
  Locus:
    Page: 34-35
    Hexagram: 4 - ䷃ - Meng
    Line: 5
By: Elizabeth Bisland
---
Hideyoshi was never a man of war. His real genius was that of statesman. When
the need could be met only by arms, he could be swift and violent; efficient
in this as in other things. Better, however, he loved the brilliant and
intricate intellectual combinations by which matters could be adjusted
without bloodshed, for above all things he admired order and beauty and the
graces of life. Tradition treasures a tale that reveals the real nature
of the man： After the last and greatest of his battles, having finally
overcome all really serious opposition, he rode a short way from the field
across which he had furiously and successfully led his forces. Dismounting
from his wearied horse he sat himself down in his armour upon the grass,
calmly announcing to his immediate attendants that he desired to divert
himself by making a flower-arrangement. The astonished retainers explained
that there were none of the appurtenances at hand for the practice of that
delicate art. Hideyoshi, pointing out that a horse bucket was close at hand
filled with water, directed them to take from his horse’s mouth the bit, one
ring of which he hung over the single handle of the bucket and then proceeded
with his still bloody sword to cut off various grasses and wild flowers which
bloomed near his seat. Using the dependent part of the bit as a flower-holder,
he spent an hour in composing one of those subtle and delicate combinations
of blossoms and foliage which his people have always so much loved. ...

\... the underlying purpose of the flower-arrangement is to purify and
abstract the mind from all violence and material consideration, to calm the
spirit and cleanse it of evil. Hideyoshi explained that he knew he should
have to judge and deal with those he had conquered, and that after he had
spent so many violent hours in combat, he felt himself in no condition to
be either kind or wise until he had entirely cooled the fury and disorder
of his emotions by exercising this delicate and exquisite art.
