---
By: 6e692c9a-52ef-49c0-a8c5-4ab5e733a7cd
Format: Verse
Source:
  ID: 8147df67-439b-4909-bfe3-d55b944af666
  Locus:
    Daily: March 14-15
Title: A Tree You Can Wind Around
---
You are like a wisteria vine in a meadow. You will naturally climb to
the highest point around as soon as you are able, and then offer your
brilliant color and scents to the world the best you can when your
tendencies ripen enough, and the temporal and eternal spring dawns.

If a tree were near your arms you would move toward it as if you were
in love, sensing some potential of giving and receiving more,
achieving your destiny, hanging from the sky, swaying with the
bee-moons happy (us) when your breasts of light are full of milk ...
when you bloom I mean, is that not clear? There is so much divinity to
harvest from your glands and your ways of being when you are kind.

All your limbs, dear, can entwine with a pillar like me and rise and
rise and rise until no one on earth can see you anymore, for there is
no limit to our height. And any nutrients you needed I could let flow
into your roots and stems, giving like some umbilical cord that is
attached to my heart.

I am the one always near. There are so many ways to touch me now. If
you sing, your sounds will press against my cheek in a way I desire.
If you dance I will become the ground you bless, as happiness does
this world. And if you make love with another form and can satisfy it,
any sighs of respite -- any congratulating noises -- are also mine.

This is just the way things have now become, in short： more delicious
our lives. One day, my angel, you will realize you accomplish
everything just by appearing amongst us.

If I thought you heard what I just said and could cash that in -- walk
off a wealthy person, I could spare myself repeating it, but I don't
mind.

There is really nothing more you can do for us than you having ...
ever been. From a realization came dawn and every benevolent wave that
still spreads out exploring the endlessness of time.
