---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 9 - ䷈ - Ch'u
    Line: 2
    Page: 66-67
By: David Prishman
Format: verse
---
In the dead of night I have heard, "Lord God, Lord God, how long?
I wither, I wither!
Wherefore hast Thou breathed this soul into me?
And wherefore hast Thou planted this heart in me?
To feel all pain, all suffering, all evil,
To hear the burden of all oppression,
All unhappiness and misfortune --
And hast bound my hands that I may not save?
Wherefore hast Thou given me an eye that sees,
And ears that listen,
That I may see the generations and their sighing,
My heart wounded with the wounds of all men,
And hast bound mine hands that I may not save?
Wherefore hast Thou created this sea of wretchedness,
And all the evil and all the oppression,
Which mine eyes will look upon for the eternity to come,
And hast breathed a spirit into me,
To curse all evil and to blast it --
But hast set a seal upon my lips that I may not curse?
Wherefore these countless multitudes of the unhappy
Which are yet to be until the end of the generations,
With the countless multitudes of their tears
Which will yet be poured into the nether waters,
And wherefore hast Thou made me to hear
The great noise of their weeping which splitteth the rocks,
And hast bound mine hands that I may not save?
Wherefore hast Thou given me the strength
To save and to redeem, to help and to rescue,
To comfort those that mourn,
To heal hearts that are broken,
To bind up all sorrows --
And hast laid chains upon mine arm?
Lord God, wherefore hast Thou made me a Redeemer,
And hast forbidden me to redeem?”

And in the dead of night there is heard a song of storm,
The storm of golden chains,
A storm of links that clash upon each other,
As often as the Messiah strains to burst his bonds,
And tears with the strength of his arm
At the Throne of Glory and the pillars thereof,
And at the heavens and the heaven of heavens --
And an echo is heard against it, in the dead of night,
The sound of a storm of chains of iron
On the face of the earth below.
From end to end of the face of earth below,
And it chances that from amidst the crimson clouds,
From amidst the chrysolite and amber,
From amidst the whiteness of white sapphire,
A Voice is heard answering： “Until a new generation arise,
A generation that will understand redemption,
A generation that will desire to be redeemed,
Whose soul will be prepared to be redeemed!
Then wilt thou too achieve thy destiny and be redeemed：
Then wilt thou too achieve thy destiny and redeem!”
