---
By: Rumi
Source:
  URL: http://www.khamush.com/divani_shams.htm
  Locus:
    Date: 28 February 2018
  Source:
    Translator: R. A. Nicholson
    Title: Selected Powms from the Divani Shamsi Tabriz
    Copyright: 1898
    Source:
      Title: Divani Shamsi Tabriz
      Chapter: XVI
---
Show thy face, for I desire the orchard and the rose-garden;
Ope thy lips, for I desire sugar in plenty.
O sun, show forth thy face from the veil of cloud,
For I desire that radiant glowing countenance.
From love for thee I hearkened to the sound of the falcon-drum;
I have returned, for the sultan's arm is my desire.
'Vex me no more,'thou saidst capriciously,'begone!'
I desire that saying of thine,'V ex me no more.'
And thy bidding off with'Depart, he is not at home,'
And the airs and pride and harshness of the door-keeper I desire.
O sweet zephyr, that blowest from the flower-plot of the Friend,
Blow on me, for I desire news of the basil.
The bread and water of destiny is like a treacherous flood;
I am a great fish and desire the sea of'Oman.
like Jacob I am uttering cries of grief,
I desire the fair face of Joseph of Canaan.
By God, without thee the city is a prison to me,
O'er mountain and desert I desire to wander.
In one hand a wine-cup and in one hand a curl of the Beloved：
Such a dance in the midst of the market-place is my desire.
My heart is weary of these weak-spirited companions;
I desire the Lion of God and Rustam, son of Zal.
Filings of beauty are in the possession of every one that exists;
I desire that quarry and that mine of exquisite loveliness.
Bankrupt tho'I be, I will not accept a small carnelian;
The mine of rare tremulous carnelian is my desire.
Of this folk I am full of complaint, weeping and weary;
I desire the drunkards'wailing and lamentation.
My soul is grown weary of Pharaoh and his tyranny
I desire the light of the countenance of Moses, son'of'Imran.
They said, r He is not to be found, we have sought Him long.'
A thing which is not to be found-that is my desire.
I am more eloquent than the nightingale, but because of vulgar envy
A seal is on my tongue, tho'I desire to moan.
Yesterday the Master with a lantern was roaming about the city,
Crying, r I am tired of devil and beast, I desire a man.'
My state has passed even beyond all yearning and desire;
I desire to go from Being and Place toward the Essentials.
He is hidden from our eyes, and all objects are from Him;
I desire that hidden One whose works are manifest.
Mine ear listened to the tale of faith and was intoxicated;
Say,'The limbs and the body and the form of faith are my desire.'
I myself am Love's rebeck, and Love is a rebeck to me;
I desire the hand and bosom and modulation of'Othman.
That rebeck is saying,, Every moment passionately
I desire the favours of the mercy of the Merciful.'
O cunning minstrel, con the rest of this ode
After this fashion, for after this fashion I desire.
Display, O Sun who art Tabriz's glory, the dawning of Love;
I am the hoopoe： the presence of Solomon is my desire.
