---
Tags:
  - Revelation=The Spiritual Experience
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 103-110
  Source:
    Title: Golf in the Kingdom
By: Michael Murphy
---
In London I met my companion of the fie de France, who was surrendering
herself to the surprises of a European summer. She had rented a Morris Minor
and was a jaunty chauffeur for a merry ride to Canterbury. We had not been
together for more than fifteen minutes before I began to relate my story
of the previous two days. Perhaps it was the shock of those events to my
nervous system or the lack of sleep, but I told the story in two or three
different versions Her woman’s eye for the absurd and her general good
spirits cast a warm spell around me and I began to sort out the deceptive
complexity of that brief visit to Scotland.

While she drove, I fell into a reverie. Pleasant and seemingly random
thoughts softened by the green English countryside, then vivid scenes from
my past forming and reforming, sorting themselves out, leading me back to
childhood like hypnotic regression. I was in warm, unaccountable spirits,
anticipation spreading in my cells as ifI knew this reverie would bring
some marvelous secret. Both of us felt that sense of zero gravity that
comes when you are traveling without an immediate or particular goal. In
Canterbury we got into the old cathedral sometime after midnight because the
wizened caretaker liked the gleam emanating from this loosening of my brain.

The next day we drove to Dover and crossed the channel to Calais. I
still remember the smell of a store there, a smell that was familiar at
once for it was the one I grew up with in my grandparents’ laundry and
kitchensalamis and parsleys and spices and consomme’s, a combination of
ingredients I could never forget. The store in Calais brought memories
of vacations in San Francisco when I was a child, with my fun-loving,
pleasure-loving Grand’me‘re and Grand’pe‘re and all their children
and cousins (many of them gourmet cooks); a peasant world, a breath of air
from the Pyrenees, full of the very same smells I found in this store in
Calais. These smells from the past gave body to my reverie as we drove
toward Rheims, absorbing me all that day until we arrived at the great
cathedral and I saw the banner and figure of Saint Jeanne d’Arc.

The memories began in earliest infancy, feelings with no graspable
image or event to hold them： feelings of cradling and rocking and
my mother’s pleasure, a time of membranes’ sensuous stretching,
with textures of reassuring blankets and diapers like warm water-beds,
adventures of water and air, a trip well begun; then an image of a
kindergarten class, watching all the others on the merry-go-round but
too uneasy to get on myself, the shy one standing near the teacher while
most of the kids screamed and laughed and fell on the whirling frame;
and a third-grade teacher with a wall of bugs and spiders in bottles
filled with horinaldehyde, my peering through protective glass at those
mysterious many-legged creepy-crawlies, knowing at once what they felt
like and curious thereafter about other beings, teeming worlds of them
appearing in books I could find on my parents' shelves and in fortunate
classrooms; then books about stars and planets and finally the mystery
underlying. I became an early philosopher -- late into puberty, early
into God-wandering into bookstores and feeling my way to the right shelf,
the opening in the mystery： somewhere in that store was a word, it never
failed, I would tell my friends that I could dowse for books, for the Word
-- the trip began into those reachings of the mind when I was still five
feet four. And then the memory of that shattering day in a class I came
to by mistake, the class of Frederic Spiegelberg, known to many of the
students in those nonphilosophical nonapocalyptic days of 1950 as the best
teacher on the Stanford campus, remembered him rolling the Sanskrit words,
intoning the Brahman and the Vedic Hymns and knowing that I could never
be the same again, that all the dowsing for books in my teen-age years
was coming into focus -- at Stanford, the fun-loving school, Spiegelberg
rolling out the Vedic Hymns, bringing a few of us home to the beginning
of things; and then our little group of dropouts in 1951, led by Walter
Page, older than we with his streak of white hair running Mohawk-style
down the middle of his head; Walt Page and his closet full of books --
a forerunner of Shivas Irons. The memory of all my teachers and conversions

rolled through me that sunny summer day in 1956. We drove into Rheims and
circled round the great cathedral, viewing it first from our car before
we found our room. I had read a long shelf of history books before this
trip, for I had decided to recapitulate the march ofWestern history on my
way to India： I wanted to get my bearings, perhaps, on my way out to
sea. The cathedral of Rheims and the armor oeranne d‘Arc were special
places on that journey back. I had read Shaw’s play and preface and two
or three books about her, for her life was one of those intersections I
needed to comprehend if I was going to find the link between this world
and the ones I was about to explore. She was apz‘tha, as the Indians
say, a place where something breaks into our workaday world and bothers
us forevermore with the hints it gives.

We found the small hotel we had heard about and asked for a room. Then
I caused a scene by asking for two rooms. My companion, first of several
good women confounded by sudden turnings of the erratic compass needle of
asceticism and sensuality in my soul, was angry and hurt, and the innkeeper
-- well, I had never encountered one so jealous of his rooms; he thought I
had asked for another because I didn’t like the one we saw first, so came
like a gallant Frenchman to my companion’s defense. After much argument
he said that this was the very last room in his inn, that, moreover,
there was not another left in the entire town. So I said we would go on
to Paris that night. In spite of all the trouble I was making, I had to
make the renunciation, there was no resisting it; I had to prepare for
whatever was emerging in these days of reverie and catharsis.

Jeanne d‘Arc. I remembered seeing sailors from a French warship with
her name on their caps while I was stationed in Puerto Rico, remembered
my uncle’s joke about being captain of the ship since he had been aboard
it once in San Francisco; he had joked about it during every party at the
Frenchmen's gatherings when I was a child, never tired of getting us to
salute, my brother and I and all our cousins, whenever he announced he was
“Captain Pierre" of the French fleet, captain of the jeamze d'Arc. As we
walked toward the Gothic spires looming now above the town I remembered
these and other associations to her name, an are joining this world to
the others, the charts on Shivas‘s wall with lines joining vertical
columns, one entitled DANGEROUS CONNECTIONS, another GOD is WAKING UP,
and his notion that God gives us a million clues but because we are so
dense he must shove some of them right in our face.

Then we came to the cathedral facade. There was construction under way
inside and you could see at once that much of it was newly built. The
ravages of bombardment during the war were still being repaired, we were
told, that was why this rear part of the towering nave looked so clean,
so free of soot and all the centuries’ calefactions, almost as ifit
had shed a skin. It was not at all as I had anticipated it, not dark and
libidinous and full of mystery; it reminded me in fact of a gigantic bower,
full of springtime leaves and sunbeams streaming through the unstained
glass. On all sides there bustled children from some French school,
whispering and giggling as they scampered after their brisk and upright
teachers： their chirping voices echoed off the tall, empty windows and
airy vaults, receding into waves of formless sound and the beginnings of
music. The cathedral of Rheims was for all the world like an airy bower,
its power and mystery was in the sound it gave back.

The sound. I was struck by the amazing swirl of it through the towering
vaults： giggling children, hollow footsteps, the occasional shout of a
workman rising above a quiet roar like distant surf.

The sound and then the tiny figure at the end of the nave. For there
she was as I had hoped, the figure of the Maid in the original armor,
carrying a banner of white that seemed four times her size.

I circled away from my friend and walked alone toward the statue, poised
at last on insight's very edge. Memories recalled and impulses cleansed,
mind empty now, a pious bore to my friend but ready nevertheless for the
omens, I came like a Sleepwalker to the point ofintersections embodied
in the relics ofSaint Joan.

Then the omens began.

As I walked up the side aisle on the right, a weathered old lady dressed
in black rose from her prayers near the aisle and watched me intently. As
I passed her she grabbed my arm. Her face had a simian look, with flaring
nostrils and flat high cheeks, and her eyes showed white as if they were
rolled back permanently from so much prayer. “Entendez vous les voix sous
les vou‘tes?” she asked with an urgent voice -- did I hear the voices
in the vaults? She rolled back her eyes and looked toward the cathedral
roof, then repeated the question. I started to pull away but felt drawn to
her strangely importuning look, for a moment I was going two ways at once.

She asked the question again with growing agitation -- did I hear the
voices? What was she driving at? She was mad, I thought, an eccentric old
peasant woman centering her delusions in her prayers. But I followed her
gestures and looked up into the cathedral vault. As I did, the echoes of
the place engulfed me.

Distant ocean waves, elusive whispers were forming in the sibilant
echoes. Yes, I could hear them, I could hear the voices. I sat down
next to her and listened. The memories and catharsis of the last few
days had prepared me perhaps for this unlikely event. I looked into the
Gothic arches, up into the overturned keel of the nave. What were they
saying? What were the old lady’s voices saying? IfI let some door in my
brain swing open, there would be a voice and a word, I had learned how to
do that during long hours of meditation. There was a resistance though,
for the voice invariably left me with nausea -- something was threatened
by such interventions and reacted with an automatic visceral no. But now I
was in a mood to let it come, the last few days had given me a taste for
abandon, yes, whatever had begun at Burningbush was carrying me to this
cathedral bench. I closed my eyes, let the swirl of sound congeal round
that elusive door in my head, and sure enough the arches spoke. A tiny
voice coming as if through distant echo chambers said, “Come home”
-- “Come home," it said again and then like distant choirs came the
beginnings ofmusic, emblazoning those words on my brain forever. Come
home, come home, I was breaking through to another realm： come home,
it said, follow the music home at last.

I will never know what happened next, for when I opened my eyes the
old lady was gone and in her stead there sat my companion of recent
days. I stretched my arms and reached out to touch her. Her hair in the
sunlight was like a halo and her eyes and mouth curled upward with fond
amusement. We looked at each other for a moment and I could see that she
understood something of what I had seen. She leaned toward me and kissed
my check and whispered that she would meet me outside when I was ready,
then rose with a little wave and slipped away,

Perhaps an hour or two had passed, judging from the change of light. It
seemed to be late afternoon and there was a hush in the cathedral now. The
armor on Saint Ioan's statue caught a ray of sunshine and flashed it back
down the lengthening nave -- perhaps the Maid was sending me signals. I
felt a faint impulse to rise and explore the place, but the afterglow of
trance held me in its blissful field： in the heavy stillness there was
the subtlest suggestion of the fairy dust Shivas had mentioned filtering
through the membranes of the inner body, as if my ordinary frame were being
transformed by the explosion of light and sound triggered by the strange
old lady. I sat for several minutes savoring the quiet and the process
of change going on inside me and thought again of Shivas. This was the kind
of thing he was into -- what a pleasure and what a privilege! The thought
occurred that he had passed the secret of it on to me. For it was said
in most of the ancient books that dam/ran, as the Indians called it, the
passing of the light, could only come directly from teacher to student,
that it was rarely mediated in any other way. I said a little prayer
of thanks to my Scottish golfing teacher.

The beams oflight shaped by the tapering walls of glass were softening now
and casting longer shadows among the branches and spreading trees on the
walls of the church. I looked around the enormous space, at Saint loan,
at the people filing out the great rear doors, at the figures kneeling in
prayer, then up to the Gothic columns, and the catwalks high above. High
in the shadows of the nave, some 90 or 100 feet above me, a tiny figure was
looking down, perhaps a workman looking for his helper. As I watched him I
realized he wasn't moving, that he was looking in my direction. I could not
discern his features but could see he was dressed in black with a frizzy
beard, that he seemed to have a smile on his face, a mad, gay little smile.

I looked around the nave, then up at the ceiling again： the bearded
face was staring down at me still, with the same little smile.

The relentless scrutiny of the distant figure was obscene. I stood up and
started down the aisle toward the cathedral sanctuary to get another angle
from which to see him. His head turned to follow my movement. There was
no doubt about it, he was watching me intently. An old lady was sweeping
at the edge of the choir; I pointed toward the figure in the rafters and
asked her who it was. She shrugged her shoulders and said she did not
speak English. “Qui est-cc?“ I asked insistently, pointing again
at the peering face. “Mais de qui parlez vous? Ie ne vois rien,”
she said in a rasping voice as she looked toward the distant ceiling,
“I don’t understand."

I jabbed my finger at the smiling face. “There, right there, don’t
you see it?”

“I don’t understand," she answered with a shrug and turned back to
her sweeping.

For a moment the lights grew dim. I looked for someone to help me, but there
was no one else in this part of the cathedral. Then I noticed a figure
walking toward me up the center aisle, a tall man with a dark beard and
priestly suit of black, a rabbi perhaps. He seemed to be looking at the
figure of Saint loan, for as he approached his head turned slowly to keep
the statue in sight. As he passed I cleared my throat and touched his arm.

“Excuse me, sir, but would you do me a favor?” As I asked the question
I glanced up to check on the figure above. It was in exactly the same
position, peering down at me with a clearly discernible smile.

“Yes?” the stranger paused and looked at me with a kind and curious
expression. He seemed strangely familiar.

“Forgive me for this,” I asked, “but I think someone is watching
me from the roof. Would you please see if you can see him?”

The stranger in black smiled through his bushy beard with a wide, slightly
bucktoothed smile and said in what seemed to be a British accent, “I
don’t think one can get into those arches.”

“But look, would you please look?” I asked again, an edge of pleading
in my voice now.

“Well, then, show me where he is," he said and turned to follow my
pointing finger. “I don’t think there is anyone there,” he said
after he had scanned the long sweep of arches in the cathedral vault.

“But look, look there,” I insisted, holding my arm so he could look
down the line of my finger. I could see the face as clearly as ever.

“I’m sorry, I'm very sorry,” he turned to face me. “I simply
cannot see him. Perhaps you’ve mistaken a gargoyle for a living
face.” He smiled another bucktoothed smile and put an arm around my
shoulder. “Young man," he said, “let me show you the banner of Saint
Ioan. That is far more interesting than a face in the roof.”

I glanced again at the staring figure. But I followed the stranger,
for his presence reassured me.

He led me to the base of the little statue. I could see when we got
there that the Maid must have been less than five feet tall. We stood
looking up at her in silence for several moments, then the kindly man
in black said in his British accent, “That banner, have you ever
seen it before?" I said that I had read about it and had seen it on a
postcard. It was surprisingly long and I wondered how the little woman
could have carried it; she must have been as strong as an ox. The stranger
moved closer and reached over to touch it. Then he stroked it gently
and brushed some dust from a fleur-de-lis. “She designed it herself,
you know,” he said. “Can you imagine the inspiration it must have
been?" I was touched by his fond regard for the ancient object. My upset
was going away. “Do you think it has some power still?” he murmured,
almost as if he were asking himself the question. “I would love to pick
it up." He touched the dusty banner now with both his hands, and for
a moment I thought he might take it from the statue. I had an image of
him holding it above his head and marching around the cathedral. He must
have sensed what I was thinking for he turned to me and winked and said,
“You be the Dauphin and I’ll be the Maid.” I was at ease by now
and gave a little laugh. Then he smiled through his bushy beard.

The bells were tolling in the cathedral of Rheims and acolytes were
lighting candles. It was time for Mass.

“Would you like to join me for the service here?" my new friend asked
with an engaging smile. “Then I will tell you some secrets about Ieanne
d’Arc." I was about to say yes, but at that very moment I saw him looking
skeptically over my shoulder -- I remember his look so well. Then I felt a
hand on my neck and knew it was Dulce, my good companion come after these
many hours to get me. There she was with her golden hair and twinkling
eyes, patient to the end with all my dallyings.

“I’m sorry," I said to the stranger, “but we have to drive to Paris
tonight. There’s not a room left in Rheims.”

He seemed to be disappointed. “Well,” he said, with a gesture toward
the cathedral roof, “at least we got rid of the ghost.” I looked up
and indeed the figure was gone. “I do that sometimes, see faces like
that,” my embarrassment must have been plain. “Thanks for your time.”

I reached out to shake his hand and he gave me a bone-crunching grip. Then
he smiled his bucktoothed smile for the last time and I saw that his gaze
was ever so slightly crossed.

“Whenever you feel oppressed," he said, “remember Saint Joan and her
angels and remember that she made herself a banner.” He raised a large
hand in farewell and waved it in front of his face as if he were opening
and closing some invisible curtain. We waved good-bye, then arm in arm
we walked outside into the light of the setting sun.
