---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 7 - ䷆ - Shih
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 58-59
By: John Masefield
---
The punishment most in use in the fleet was flogging on the bare back
with the cat-o’-nine-tails. The cat was a short, wooden stick, covered
with red baize. The tails were of tough knotted cord, about two feet
long. The thieves' cat, with which thieves were flogged, had longer and
heavier tails, knotted throughout their length. Flogging was inflicted
at the discretion of the captain. It was considered the only punishment
likely to be effective with such men as manned the royal ships . ... It
was perhaps the most cruel and ineffectual punishment ever inflicted. The
system was radically bad, for many captains inflicted flogging for all
manner of offences, without distinction. The thief was flogged, the
drunkard was flogged, the laggard was flogged. The poor, wretched topman
who got a ropeyard into a buntline block was flogged. The very slightest
transgression was visited with flogging. Those seamen who had any pride
remaining in them went in daily fear of being flogged. Those who had been
flogged were generally callous, careless whether they were flogged again,
and indifferent to all that might happen to them. It was a terrible weapon
in the hands of the officers. In many cases the officers abused the power,
by the infliction of excessive punishment for trifling offences. The sailors
like a smart captain. They liked to be brought up to the mark, and if a
captain showed himself a brave man, a good seaman, and a glutton for hard
knocks, they would stand any punishment he chose to inflict knowing that
such a one would not be unjust. They hated a slack captain, for a slack
captain left them at the mercy of the underlings, and that, they said,
was “hell afloat.” But worse than any thing they hated a tyrant,
a man who flogged his whole ship’s company for little or no reason,
or for the infringement of his own arbitrary rules. Such a man, who kept
his crew in an agony of fear, hardly knowing whether to kill themselves or
their tyrant, was dreaded by all. He was not uncommon in the service until
the conclusion of the Great War. It was his kind who drove so many of our
men into the American navy. It was his kind who did so much to cause the
mutinies at the Nore and the Spithead, the loss of the Hermione frigate,
and (to some extent) the losses we sustained in the American War. Lastly,
it was his kind who caused so many men to desert, in defiance of the stern
laws against desertion. That kind of captain was the terror of the fleet.
