---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 11 - ䷊ - T'ai
    Line: 2
    Page: 82
By: Karl Jaspers
---
\[Buddha and Buddhism] are far away from us, and this we must not
forget. For Buddha, insight requires： exercises in meditation, a life of
indifference toward the world and its tasks. It will not suffice to attempt
a scientific experiment and see how much we can accomplish with a few Yoga
exercises. Nor will it suffice to develop a mood of indifference to the
world and devote ourselves to contemplation. Those who have not tested
the progress of which they are capable by years of meditative exercises
grounded in the proper faith and way of life, can understand only as much
as is communicable in rational thought. In Buddha and Buddhism there flows
a source which we Westerners have not tapped, and consequently there is a
limit to our understanding. We must first of all acknowledge that Buddhism
is far removed from us and renounce all quick, easy ways of coming closer
to it. To participate in the essence of Buddha’s truth, we should have
to cease to be what we are. The difference lies not in rational positions
but in the whole view of life and manner of thinking.

But the remoteness of Buddhism need not make us forget that we are all men,
all facing the same questions of human existence. In Buddha and Buddhism
a great solution was found and put into practice. Our task is to acquaint
ourselves with it and as far as possible to understand it. ... I believe
such an understanding is possible if we avoid excessive haste and supposedly
definitive interpretations. In understanding, we keep alive potentialities
that are locked deep within ourselves, and by understanding we learn not
to take our own historicity for the absolute, exclusive truth. To my mind
everything that is said in the Buddhist text is addressed to a normal waking
consciousness and must therefore be largely accessible to rational thought.

The fact is that Buddha’s life was possible and that Buddhist life has
been a reality in various parts of Asia down to our own day -- this is a
great and important fact. It points to the questionable essence of man. A
man is not what he just happens to be; he is open. For him there is no
one correct solution.
