---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 39-44
  Source:
    Title: Stories of Happy People
By: Lars Gustafsson
Title: Out of the Pain
---
The pain, which until now had had sole dominion and been its own universe,
slowly rotating on its own enigmatic axis, at last started to change color
from whitish green to red.

He became aware of a stubborn voice drilling and drilling inside of him,
a nagging voice which went through Greek verb forms, a teacher in his old
boarding school with its dark vaults, who must have died a long time ago. And
now he went through the aorist forms of one Greek verb after the other;
he never wanted to stop, and the terrible thing was that it was completely
unnecessary.

He already knew all the Greek verbs in both the imperfect and the aorist tense.

In this world, the gray-green world where he was, there ought not to be
any Greek verbs, and slowly he was reminded that once there must have been
another world, one where such conditions existed.

The world ofpain was full, complete, a universe where nothing could
be subtracted or added. This was the most perfect of all worlds, for it
contained a single characteristic, and this characteristic was spread evenly
through space.

In this other world, the one which must have existed once, like the monotonous
droning of'an old high school teacher, like the faint movements ofivy
outside the windows just before afternoon rain, like the smell of chalk and
ink, like the traces ofgenerations ofpenknives in desk tops of sturdy ash,
like the smell of vomit from his own pillow (evidently this time it hadn't
helped to put a basin next to the couch when his migraine attack started)
which he found undescribably disgusting, and which at the same time reminded
him that in that other world, something like himself must exist -- in this
other world, there was a sense ofloss. It was less perfect. It was toward
the end of the fourth day of one of his really major migraine attacks, the
ones that surpassed all understanding, and while the afternoon outside the
drawn brown curtains slowly changed to evening, he gradually became aware
that he must be in a room in a pension-one of the cheaper pensions-on the
shore of Lago Maggiore where the cheap hotels were, east of Lugano, and the
wallpaper, which was very dark, had a rhomboid pattern.

The rhombs were drawn with lines that must once have been a kind of golden
color but which had now turned green.

Between him and the oilcloth-covered desk, the kerosene lamp, the travel
inkbottle with its safety cork, the green notebooks that he had busied himself
with last week, there was now a sea. Portugal or the Cyclades could not be
any harder to reach than his desk.

There wasn't much else in the room. The bed he was lying on, which you could
convert into a couch in the daytime, with a pillowcase now smeared with his
own greenish vomit.

The washstand with the basin he had moved temporarily close to the bed, two
bulging leather trunks, worn, once elegant perhaps, with traces of careless
handling by innumerable coachmen and porters, the always well-brushed but
ever more frayed overcoat on its hook by the door.

The lake was not having one of its great sunsets. As soon as dusk had fallen,
quick gusts of wind -- the kind that makes it so dangerous for sailors --
swept across, the northern part of the lake; from the vicinity of Brissago,
the sound of thunder.

The raindrops beat against the window like the children’s hands.

Every time he tried to open his eyes, he could see a little more clearly.
And -- something that was a still better sign -- his double vision had
almost completely disappeared. It seemed that this was the end of one of
his really big, totally devastating migraine attacks. However, he could not
discount the possibility that it was simply a pause, a lull in the storm,
morbidly still water in the eye of the tropical storm, where, in principle,
he might be able to stay for twenty-four hours, hardly longer.

This sort of thing had happened before： he had started hoping too soon.

Right in the eye of the storm, in these lulls between the pain that seared
his head with white heat and this terrible nausea, which continued day in and
day out, long after his stomach was emptied of its thin contents, here in the
middle of the lull there was knowledge to be had, strange, almost yellowish
knowledge (in this condition even the most abstract phenomena had colors).

It might be about words, about how the words turned into narrow, as it were
Newtonian rings in all the colors of the rainbow, gliding swiftly across the
not completely pure surface into very deep and dark water. When the words
collided with each other, they could either repel each other or attract each
other, forming long molecular chains.

Until the chain became too heavy, or too pretentious, and then it would
break again.

It might be about hzktory, about events, about monarchs, about war, about
crowds of people moving restlessly through the narrow, stepped alleys of
Oriental cities, about speakers in town squares, where sharp sunlight made
the shadows fall hard and pitiless.

And all this, the noise in the squares, the throngs of people, the pitiless
light across bent backs, assumed the shape of a rising and falling surge,
the surge of sound in a large seashell.

Or the sound of the movements on the surface when, deep down in moving
water, you still sense the movements of the surface, its ringing, rising,
and falling sounds, like the fragments of distant music.

And this history existed. Or did not exist, lust as you liked. He no longer
remembered how many weeks there had been since he last saw blue sky.

He needed a clear sky, a great, completely spotless-no, he meant cloudless --
sky in order to think clearly.

Under gray skies, the shadows threatened him.

Oh, if only he were in Sils, if it had been lovely late summer in the Upper
Engadin instead of heavy November in the lowlands!

But Sils was long since covered by deep snow; all the passes were closed, and
the lodges were closed. Across the green meadows up by Ley, across the paths
to Val Fex, there was now only this heavy whirl ofdarkness and snow-storms.

And the child-hands of the rain continued to beat against the window --
pane, knocking restlessly as ifthey really wanted to get in.

If only there had been someone!

But the single person from whom he might count on something that even remotely
resembled human interest was the blond proprietress of the pension, already
past her prime, who pattered uneasily along the hallways, up and downstairs
at late hours like a restless spirit, and who, on at least one occasion,
had looked in on him to “see if he was sick.”

God how he detested her!

There was in her witchlike, stooping gait, in her slovenly stockings, sagging
around her ankles, in her sharp, determined nose, in her shrill voice --
something which, in some awful way, reminded him of his sister.

One of those connoisseurs of souls, one of those who venture forth at dusk
to stalk their prey. A word to the wise is sufficient.

At this moment, he realized that he was on his way back into the ordinary
world; he was again capable of hatred, and that was enough to tell him that
once again he had survived, that he had grown stronger again.

These moments when he returned he liked to imagine as a hunter's return from
a long hunt in a deep, impenetrable forest. Ifonly he knew what kind of prey
he carried with him from there.

It had been the same thing for almost his entire life. It wasn’t true
that it had started in Basel -- it was only the pain that had started in
Basel. He’d felt it much earlier than that, as early as Pforta -- like
some strange state between dream and waking, which could sneak up on him in
the middle of a class, a buzzing in the deepest layer of his consciousness
as ifa wasp were shut up in there.

Perhaps it had started after the winter when one of his stubborn boyhood
colds had turned into an ear infection and, quite obviously, penetrated the
line membranes of his brain. No one had actually taken it seriously.

Or else it might have been part of him from birth： his mother, too, had
a frail, precarious constitution.

No matter： it had broken out in Basel. It had turned into fate, destiny.
Perhaps it was in Basel that he had decided on it-or it had decided on him.

The dusk outside, which had never been proper day, was changing into
night. For the first time in a long while he started feeling something
resembling ordinary, normal sleepiness. That was always a good sign.

He started thinking about how many years it might be since he had left his
professorship in Basel, the blessed professorship, along with his students, his
friends, his colleagues, the friendly, ancient city with its green-shimmering
roofs, its little friendly bars with windows of leaded glass and heavy oak
tables, Basel with its friendly smells of beer, sausage, and ash-wood fires,
Basel where so much water flows under the bridges.

Paradise, but hell at the same time. Of course, it was the pain that drove
him away from there, but just as much the awareness that it wasn't his life.
He calculated it must be twelve years already -- twelve years of loneliness,
of illness, of days and nights such that only the bravest person would dare
to imagine them repeated.

Hours, and again hours, of uninterrupted nearsighted writing, his whole
head bent over the table, his thick glasses only an inch above the paper;
happy, ecstatic writing, while the ticking of the clocks receded and became
unimportant, while mealtimes passed and were forgotten; writing like a silent,
ongoing feast, where the music that slumbered at the heart of things became
audible and was transformed into a note endurable to human sense.

For this mysterious music you had to be prepared to sacrifice a lot.

And so： Ariadne, faceless, or faceless in memory, deep inside the labyrinth,
in memory surrounded by a music inaudible in the ordinary world. Ariadne,
surrounded by nothing but her music; Ariadne, who was at once his key and
his jailer.

How far in the past those secret days in Treibchen, those short trips
across the big lake, how fragile those memories! And just the same, they
held him captive.

Like reflections in a lake, this world multiplied continuously.

And yet he could never be sure whether this world of repetitions was the
real world or he was moving among mirrors a sorcerer had arranged in his
prison to ensure his calmness or docility.

Around him, outside the windows, the world darkened; the squalls over the
lake took on renewed force. Around him, Europe was industrializing itself--
a Europe which, with each passing year, became more unlike itself, more and
more a parody, an evil repetition created by inferior gods. From the desolate
autumnal fields streamed the poor of the earth, the former bond slaves of
Pomerania and Mecklenburg, to fill the factories. The English cities grew
like evil mushrooms under their clouds of smoke.

Old bonds and old curses were being replaced by others, heavier, unfamiliar.

Soon the smoke of the locomotives would rise toward the ceilings of the
railroad stations" cast-iron cathedrals： oh, he knew them already. How
often hadn‘t be seen them at night out of a dirty, steamed-up window, wrapped
in his lap robe, cold as always, squeezed into a corner of the compartment,
taking cover from night and loneliness.

Truly, wasn't he a Minotaur, alone in the night, alone at his own birth,
forever locked into the labyrinth of this century?

From that thought there was only a very short step to the leave-taking from
his friends, from the disdained, misunderstood friends, Paul Ree and Lou.

He wanted, and he didn’t want, to imagine that leave-taking one last
time. He had thought about it all too many times, and always with the same
horrible feeling of having made himself less than he was.

Oh, he remembered everything as ifit had happened just a few minutes ago：
the leave-taking, the conversations, his sister’s awful intervention,
his own childish surprise that someone was capable of abandoning him.

And although he had thought these thoughts so many times, it was only at
this moment he realized that everything would have been perfect without him.

The lives of his friends, the lives of his parents, this new world with its
rootless proletarian masses journeying from one kind of slavery to another,
from the rainy earth to the dark factories, these new smithies capable of
forging the bonds of the future. And everything taking place during hopeful
singing of Sankey's evangelical hymns in new houses of prayer with other
rhythms than the pietistic rhythms of his childhood： the Crucified One,
on his way to conquer India with cotton cloth and rob Asia of its budding
industries in favor of a Christian world market, everything, from beginning
to end, from the first lesson in morphology in the dark halls of Pforta,
everything would have been perfect without him.

And -- it suddenly struck him-his task was exactly that. He war a truth. He
was the point of an incidental but very clever joke.

This leave-taking -- so far back in time -- whose hands still beat on the
window, from Ree, from Lou, was, in spite of the continuing fever of the wound,
the most beautiful thing he had experienced. So light and cheerful, and at
the same time so serious and deep that he could still recall its breathing,
it was a vehement reminder that life is easy, that it consists of purest lust,
and that it only exists for those who are able to dance and to laugh.
