---
By: Jalal al-din Rumi
Source:
  - Title: Mystical Poems of Rumi
    Chapter: 54
    Page: 48
    Translator: A. J. Arberry
    Copyright: 1968
    ISBN: 0226731510
Tags:
  - initiation
  - union
---
That spirit which wears not true love as a garment is better not to have been;
  its being is nothing but disgrace.
Be drunk in love, for love is all that exists;
  without the commerce of love there is no admittance to the Beloved.
They say, "What is love?" Say "The abandonment of free will."
  He who has not escaped out of free will, no free will has he.
The lover is an emperor; the two worlds are scattered over him;
  the king pays no heed to the scattering.
Love it is and the lover that remain till all eternity;
  set not your heart on aught but this, for it is merely borrowed.
How long will you embrace a dead beloved?
  Embrace the soul which naught embraces.
What was born of spring dies in the season of autumn;
  love's rosebower receives no replenishment from spring.
The rose that comes of spring, the thorn is its companion;
  the wine that comes of pressed grapes is not exempt from crop-sickness.
Be not an expectant spectator on this path;
  for by Allah, there is no death worse than expectancy.
Set your heart on the true coin, if you are not counterfeit;
  give ear to this subtlety, if you lack an earring.
Tremble not on the body's steed; fare lighter afoot;
  God gives wings to him who rides not on the body.
Let go care and become wholly clear of heart,
  like the face of a mirror without image and picture --
When it has become clear of images, all images are contained in it;
  that clear-faced one is not ashamed of any man's face.
Would you have your self clear of blemish?
  Gaze upon Him, for He is not ashamed or afraid of the truth.
Since the steely face gained this skill from purity,
  what shall the heart's face, which is without dust, discover?
I said, "What shall it discover?" No, I will not say;
  silence is better, lest the heart-ravisher should say,
  "He cannot keep a secret."
