---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Imprisonment
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 336-339
  Source:
    Title: Man's Search for Meaning
By: Viktor E. Frankl
Title: Experiences in a Concentration Camp
---
In spite of all the enforced physical and mental primitiveness of the
life in a concentration camp, it was possible for spiritual life to
deepen. Sensitive people who were used to a rich intellectual life may
have suffered much pain (they were often of a delicate constitution),
but the damage to their inner selves was less. They were able to retreat
from their terrible surroundings to a life of inner riches and spiritual
freedom. Only in this way can one explain the apparent paradox that some
prisoners ofa less hardy make-up often seemed to survive camp life better
than did those of a robust nature. In order to make myself clear, I am
forced to fall back on personal experience. Let me tell what happened on
those early mornings when we had to march to our work site.

There were shouted commands： “Detachment, forward
march! Left-23-4! Left-2-3-4l Left-2-3e4l Left-z-3-4! First man about,
left and left and left and left! Caps off!" These words sound in my ears
even now. At the order “Caps off!” we passed the gate of the camp,
and searchlights were trained upon us. Whoever did not march smartly got
a kick. And worse off was the man who, because of the cold, had pulled
his cap back over his ears before permission was given.

We stumbled on in the darkness, over big stones and through large puddles,
along the one road leading from the camp. The accompanying guards kept
shouting at us and driving us with the butts of their rifles. Anyone with
very Sore feet supported himselfon his neighbor’s arm. Hardly a word
was spoken; the icy wind did not encourage talk. Hiding his mouth behind
his upturned collar, the man marching next to me whispered suddenly：
“If our wives could see us now! I do hope they are better off in their
camps and don’t know what is happening to us."

That brought thoughts of my own wife to mind. And as we stumbled on
for miles, slipping on icy spots, supporting each other time and again,
dragging one another up and onward, nothing was said, but we both knew：
each of us was thinking of his wife. Occasionally I looked at the sky,
where the stars were fading and the pink light of the morning was beginning
to spread behind a dark bank ofclouds. But my mind clung to my wife’s
image, imagining it with an uncanny acuteness. I heard her answering me,
saw her smile, her frank and encouraging look. Real or not, her look was
then more luminous than the sun which was beginning to rise.

A thought transfixed me： for the first time in my life I saw the truth
as it is set into song by so many poets, proclaimed as the final wisdom
by so many thinkers. The truth-that love is the ultimate and the highest
goal to which man can aspire. Then I grasped the meaning of the greatest
secret that human poetry and human thought and belief have to impart：
The salvation ofman is through love and in love. I understood how a man
who has nothing left in this world still may know bliss, be it only for
a brief moment, in the contemplation ofhis beloved. In a position ofutter
desolation, when man cannot express himself in positive action, when his
only achievement may consist in enduring his sufferings in the right way-an
honorable way-in such a position man can, through loving contemplation
ofthe image he carries of his beloved, achieve fulfillment. For the first
time in my life I was able to understand the meaning of the words, “The
angels are lost in perpetual contemplation of an infinite glory.”

In front of me a man stumbled and those following him fell on top of
him. The guard rushed over and used his whip on them all. Thus my thoughts
were interrupted for a few minutes. But soon my soul found its way back
from the prisoners existence to another world, and I resumed talk with
my loved one： I asked her questions, and she answered; she questioned
me in return, and I answered.

“Stop!” We had arrived at our work site. Everybody rushed into the
dark hut in the hope ofgetting a fairly decent tool. Each prisoner got
a spade or a pickaxe.

“Can’t you hurry up, you pigs?" Soon we had resumed the previous day's
positions in the ditch. The frozen ground cracked under the point of the
pickaxes, and sparks flew. The men were silent, their brains numb.

My mind still clung to the image of my wife. A thought crossed my mind：
I didn‘t even know if she were still alive. I knew only one thingwhich I
have learned well by now： Love goes very far beyond the physical person
of the beloved. It finds its deepest meaning in his spiritual being, his
inner self. Whether or not he is actually present, whether or not he is
still alive at all, ceases somehow to be ofimportance.

I did not know whether my wife was alive, and I had no means offinding
out (during all my prison life there was no outgoing or incoming mail);
but at that moment it ceased to matter. There was no need for me to know;
nothing could touch the strength of my love, my thoughts, and the image
of my beloved. Had I known then that my wife was dead, I think that I
would still have given myself, undisturbed by that knowledge, to the
contemplation of her image, and that my mental conversation with her
would have been just as vivid and just as satisfying. “Set me like a
seal upon thy heart, love is as strong as death.“

This intensification of inner life helped the prisoner find a refuge
from the emptiness, desolation and spiritual poverty of his existence, by
letting him escape into the past. When given free rein, his imagination
played with past events, often not important ones, but minor happenings
and trifling things. His nostalgic memory glorified them and they assumed
a strange character. Their world and their existence seemed very distant
and the spirit reached out for them longingly： In my mind I took bus
rides, unlocked the front door of my apartment, answered my telephone,
switched on the electric lights. Our thoughts often centered on such
details, and these memories could move one to tears.

As the inner life ofthe prisoner tended to become more intense, he also
experienced the beauty ofart and nature as never before. Under their
influence he sometimes even forgot his own frightful circumstances. If
someone had seen our faces on the journey from Auschwitz to a Bavarian camp
as we beheld the mountains of Salzburg with their summits glowing in the
sunset, through the little barer windows of the prison carriage, he would
never have believed that those were the faces of men who had given up all
hope of life and liberty. Despite that factor -- or maybe because of it --
we were carried away by nature’s beauty, which we had missed for so long.

In camp, too, a man might draw the attention of a comrade working next to
him to a nice view ofthe setting sun shining through the tall trees of the
Bavarian woods (as in the firmous watercolor by Du" rer), the same woods
in which we had built an enormous, hidden munitions plant. One evening,
when we were already resting on the floor ofour hut, dead tired, soup
bowls in hand, a fellow prisoner rushed in and asked us to run out to the
assembly grounds and see the wonderful sunset. Standing outside we saw
sinister clouds glowing in the west and the whole sky alive with clouds of
everchanging shapes and colors, from steel blue to blood red. The desolate
gray mud huts provided a sharp contrast, while the puddles on the muddy
ground reflected the glowing sky. Then, after minutes ofmoving silence,
one prisoner said to another, “How beautiful the world could be!”

Another time we were at work in a trench. The dawn was gray around us;
gray was the sky above; gray the snow in the pale light of dawn; gray
the rags in which my fellow prisoners were clad, and gray their faces. I
was again conversing silently with my wife, or perhaps I was struggling
to find the reaxon for my sufferings, my slow dying. In a last violent
protest against the hopelessness of imminent death, I sensed my spirit
piercing through the enveloping gloom. I felt it transcend that hopeless,
meaningless world, and from somewhere I heard a victorious “Yes” in
answer to my question of the existence of an ultimate purpose. At that
moment a light was lit in a distant farmhouse, which stood on the horizon
as ifpainted there, in the midst of the miserable gray ofa dawning morning
in Bavaria. " Et lux in tenebris lucet"- and the light shineth in the
darkness. For hours I stood hacking at the icy ground. The guard passed by,
insulting me, and once again I communed with my beloved. More and more I
felt that she was present, that she was with me; I had the feeling that
I was able to touch her, able to stretch out my hand and grasp hers. The
feeling was very strong： she was there. Then, at that very moment,
a bird flew down silently and perched just in front of me, on the heap
ofsoil which I had dug up from the ditch, and looked steadily at me.
