---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 21 - ䷔ - Shih Ho
    Line: 5
    Page: 142-143
By: Mikhail Rodzianko
---
On January 20, I had an audience with the Tsar.

“From my second report, Your Majesty may have seen that I regard the
situation as worse than ever. The frame of mind of the country is such that
very serious outbreaks may be expected. Political divisions no longer exist,
but Russia, as one, demands a change in Government, and the appointment
of a responsible Prime Minister who has the confidence of the country. It
is necessary to work in agreement with the legislative bodies and public
organizations in order to organize the rear and conquer the enemy. To our
great shame in these war times, everything is in disorder. There is no
government, no system, and no cooperation between front and rear. Wherever
one looks he sees only disorder and betrayal. ... The idea spreads that
everything is done that harms Russia and benefits the enemy. Strange
rumors circulate about traitors and spies in the rear of the army. There
is not one honest man in your entourage; all decent people have either
been sent away or have left. ... It is no secret that the Empress issues
State orders without consulting you; that Ministers go to her with their
reports; and that at her will those she disapproves of are removed and are
replaced by others who are totally unfit. ... She is regarded as a partisan
of Germany, which she protects. Even the common people speak of it.” ...

I then turned the conversation to the front and recalled how I had pleaded
with him not to take the supreme command and that now, after the failure
on the Rumanian front, all blame fell upon him.

“Do not bring about a situation, Your Majesty, which will force your
subjects to choose between you and the good of the country. Until now,
Tsar and country have been one, but lately a distinction has been made.”

The Tsar pressed his head with his hands and said： " Is it possible
that for twenty-two years I have tried to do some good, and that for
twenty-two years I have failed?”

It was a trying moment.

“Yes, Your Majesty, for twenty-two years you have followed the wrong
trail.”
