---
Title: Quick! Who Can Save This Cat?
By: Zoketsu Norman Fischer
Description: Zoketsu Norman Fischer's commentary on
  Mumonkan Case 14 - Nanchuan's Cat
Source:
  URL: https://www.lionsroar.com/quick-who-can-save-this-cat/
  Locus:
    Date: 4 May 2018
Format: mixed
Media:
  - 2321aedb-e544-4647-bfc2-e9aebb580cd4
---
Nanchuan saw the monks of the eastern and western halls fighting over a cat,
Seizing the cat, he told the monks： “If any of you can say a word of
Zen, you will save the cat.” No one answered, Nanchuan cut the cat in
two, That evening Zhaozho returned to the monastery and Nanchuan told him
what had happened. Zhaozho removed his sandals, placed them on his head,
and walked out, Nanchuan said： “If you had been there, you would have
saved the cat.”

Why did Zhaozho put his sandals on his head? If you can answer this
question, you will understand exactly that Nanchuan’s action was not
in vain, If not, danger!

  Had Zhaozho been there
  He would have taken charge.
  Zhaozho snatches the sword
  And Nanchuan begs for his life.

This story involves Nanchuan (Japanese： Nansen) and Zhaozho (Joshu),
two of the most important figures in Zen history. Zhaozho came to Nanchuan
when he was only about twenty years old, Nanchuan was lying down taking
a nap when the young man approached, Sitting up in bed, he asked the Zen
question (a wonderful question for anyone at any time), “Where have you
come from?” Zhaozho replied, “I come from Standing Buddha Temple.”
“Are there any standing Buddhas there?” asked Nanchuan. Zhaozho
replied, “Here I see a reclining Buddha.” Zhaozho was a sincere,
steady practitioner, devoted to his teacher, with whom he remained for
forty years, They were very close, as this story shows, and they worked
together to create a good learning environment for the monks.

Both Nanchuan and Zhaozho figure in many stories in the koan collections,
The present case is probably the best-known-and most disturbing-case in all
of Zen, We could compare it to a similar story that appears in the Bible,
involving the wise king Solomon and a baby, As the tale goes, two women
are arguing over a baby, both claiming to be the mother, Like Nanchuan,
Solomon proposes to solve the dispute by cutting the baby in two, He
intends to give half to each of the women, an eminently fair solution,
One of the women speaks up immediately and says, “No, don’t do it, I
am not the mother, Give the child to her!” And so Solomon discovers that
she is the real mother, the one who cares most for the child’s welfare.

The Solomon story is tidier and nicer than the story of Nanchuan and the
cat, We can easily discern its point, whereas Zen stories seem harder
to appreciate, People get confused when you say to them, “Say a word
of Zen!” They can’t help but think there is something to this that
they don’t understand, It paralyzes them, They can’t say anything,
They think about it in a panic, and the more they think the more baffled
they become, A Zen monk is not half as smart as a mother, A mother knows
about love and devotion, so she is never speechless when it comes to the
welfare of her child, If the mother in the Solomon story had been there
she would have said to Nanchuan, “What’s the matter with you? How can
you even think of killing that cat? You are a Zen priest who has taken a
precept against killing!” Surely these words would have saved the cat,
If the monks had been reasonable ordinary feeling human beings instead
of stupid monks with Zen gold dust in their eyes, they would have spoken
up like that or simply grabbed the cat and run away, But they couldn’t
do it, Maybe they were too intimidated by the prestige of the teacher.

In commenting on the case, Dogen said, “If I were Nanchuan, I would have
said, ‘If you cannot say a true word of Zen I will cut the cat, and if
you can say a true word of Zen I will also cut the cat.'” This would
have been a much less misleading challenge than the one posed by Nanchuan,
If I were one of the monks I would have said, “We can’t answer, Please,
Master, cut the cat in two if you can.” Or, “Nanchuan, you know how to
cut the cat in two, but can you show us how to cut the cat in one?” And
again Dogen says, “If I were Nanchuan and the monks could not answer,
I would say, ‘Too bad you cannot answer,’ and then I would release
the cat.”

We are all cut in two of course, That’s living in this world of
discrimination and difference, I am me; therefore, I am not you, But
we are also cut in one, only we don’t know it, Being cut in one is
“I am me and all is included in that, you and everything else.” We
practice zazen to remember that we are cut in one, as well as two, When
we are dead, we’ll all be cut in one and only one, But we are dying
all the time, If we are Zen monks, we devote ourselves to sitting on
our cushions so that we can see this and integrate it into our everyday
living, When Zhaozho comes back later and puts his sandals on his head,
this is what he is saying, Putting a sandal on the head was a sign of
mourning in ancient China. Zhaozho is expressing, “Teacher, do not fool
me with your pantomime, You and I both know that the cat is already dead,
You and I are already dead, All disputes are already settled, All things
are beyond coming and going, vast and wide, at peace.”

This same story appears in the two other major koan collections, the
Blue Cliff Record and the Book of Serenity, and the commentaries there
say that Nanchuan did not cut the cat in two but only pantomimed doing
it. Zen teachers do not commit murder, the commentaries say, even to make
an important point.

In Zen precepts study it is always noted that there are three levels
of precept practice-the literal, the compassionate and the ultimate,
On the literal level we follow the precepts according to their explicit
meanings-not to kill means not to kill, not even a bug, But on the
compassion level we recognize the complexity of living-sometimes not
to kill one thing is to kill something else, The network of causality
is endlessly complex; our human ideas cannot encompass it, We recognize
that precepts will be broken sometimes and we affirm that our guide for
precept practice will not be literality but compassion, We will follow
precepts with a heart of love for beings, That motivation may sometimes
cause us to break precepts in order to help someone.

On the third level of precept study, the ultimate level, we recognize that
there is no breaking precepts, Precepts can neither be broken nor kept,
for they-like all that is-are empty of any identifiable self, When we
understand this deep truth, we naturally want to follow precepts with a
wide and flexible heart, This case involves the ultimate level of precept
practice： the recognition that there is no killing, that life can never
be killed-or to put it another way, that life is already dead, When we
know life at this level, we can really appreciate its preciousness, It
is this recognition that Nanchuan and Zhaozho have, but that the monks lack.

This is not just Zen talk, It’s really true, We think death is later,
but death is not later, It’s now, as each moment passes irrevocably,
No wonder we can’t see this, It’s too terrifying! Our death doesn’t
happen all of a sudden; it happens gradually-and always, But it is also true
that our death never comes, When we enter what is conventionally called
“death,” the “I” we have always thought we were melts away, but
the “I” we always actually were and always will be remains, as ever,
unmoving, Although this may sound paradoxical, it’s a plain truth,
probably the most basic of all human truths： we are always dying,
and there is no such thing as death, Seen in this light, the precepts
are ultimately not simply rules of ethical conduct, a list of do’s
and don’t’s, They are possibilities for us to understand life’s
profundity through our conduct in the ordinary world, Practice of the
precepts takes us to the root of what it means to be alive, to the center
of the human problem of meaning, We are always faced with the question
whose depths we will never be able to fathom： what do I do with this
life now? This is precepts practice.

We should back up a little bit, though： the monks in the east and west
hall were arguing about a cat, In most monasteries in ancient China the
community was divided, Some monks lived in the meditation hall, devoting
full time to formal practice, while others were working monks who did the
necessary support work for the monastery： cooking, farming, fixing,
chopping firewood, and so on, These two kinds of monks were probably
housed in different halls, the east hall and the west hall.

As soon as there are two halls and two functions, there are different
viewpoints and inevitably there are disputes over which viewpoint is
correct, In our Zen Center exactly this thing used to happen all the time,
It probably still does, The monks who specialize in work think the monks
who meditate a lot are indulging their taste for peace and quiet and are
unrealistic about the world; meanwhile, the meditators think the workers are
too worldly and are not really interested in doing the practice, This clash
of perspectives happens in all monasteries and there is sometimes great
strife, The Catholics had conflicts between the choir monks and the lay
brothers that went on for centuries until Vatican II, a sweeping program of
reform instituted in the 1960’s, abolished the tradition of lay brothers.

The same thing happens of course, and much more tragically, in the world
at large, Jews-to take one drastic example among many-think Israel is
their place, and that their customs and traditions should prevail there,
while Palestinians think it is their place, and therefore their customs and
traditions should prevail, Neither side considers its view to be merely
a preference, an option among options, It is the truth, In Nanchuan’s
monastery maybe the working monks thought the cat would do very well in the
kitchen as a mouser, The meditating monks, whose minds were very subtle,
tender and compassionate, could not bear the thought of a cat killing mice,
This was, after all, murder! So the monks fought over the cat, When there
is difference and the underlying essence of difference-which is oneness-is
not understood and appreciated, there will always be fighting, None of us
is free from being blinded by our own view, So how do you handle this kind
of situation? Which side are you on? What do you do? Nanchuan demonstrates.

In Zen a knife always suggests Manjushri’s sword of wisdom that slices
through emptiness, cuts through duality, It sees that life and death
are intertwined, good and bad are intertwined, Israelis and Palestinians
depend on each other, Manjushri’s sword cuts through attachment to view,
showing that all views depend on each other and arise from an underlying
unity that is no view, The truth is beyond views; it is just life as is
really is -- unexplainable.

So Nanchuan uses Manjushri’s sword in a little piece of street theater
designed to take the monks’ dispute to another level, Never mind the
cat, he is saying-what is life, what is death, why are we alive? You
monks-and all we humans-are arguing over a cat while the world is burning
up in front of our eyes! Wake up! Don’t waste time! The problems of the
world are actually fairly easy to solve, But people can’t get along,
can’t work together, can’t harmonize their views, so nothing gets
done, Things only get worse, Technical and social solutions are at hand,
but political problems block them at every turn-and that’s the worst
problem in the world.

I think this case strikes to the heart of what it means to be a monk in the
world, which is our challenge as dharma students： to be fully committed
to our practice, to make it the only thing in our lives, and yet to honor
our daily activity in the world as the expression of our practice, How
do we do that? We are all monks of the east hall-and of the west hall,
We are all activists and quietists, How do we manage this?

Thomas Merton wrote about the special function of the monk for the world,
The monk, he felt, lives life radically in holiness, apart from the world,
Monks are unusual people, They are and must be outsiders, This means they
are not on any one side, They are committed to truth, which means love,
so they can’t be attached to one side or another, Monks can’t hate,
They can’t justify their views as right, They must always come back to the
center, to zero, to the present moment, the in-between moment, beyond views.

So although monks may live harmoniously in the midst of society, they are
always subversives-working internally and externally against the dominant
modes of greed, hate and delusion that make the world go round, Monks are
living examples of an alternative to the self-centered ways of the world,
They are secret agents of a foreign power-the power of selfless love, Not
that they have a superior attitude about this, In fact the most important
practice for a monk is humility, which is the practice of being aware of
the selfishness that arises in our own mind continually, while remaining
clearly committed to the effort to go beyond selfishness-and to encourage
others to do the same.

I know a Christian hermit whose lifetime has been devoted to the study of
the writings of Simone Weil, Weil was an extraordinary person, a French Jew
who was a Catholic mystic, Her life was a testament to this union of the
opposites of activism and quietism, She was a mystic through and through,
and yet most of her life was spent in extreme political activism, She was
a witness for peace in the Spanish Civil War, a Marxist who wrote for a
workers’ newspaper and was active in workers’ parties, She worked
in an automobile plant and as a grape picker so that she could be in
solidarity with ordinary working people, Living in England during World
War II, sick from overwork, she died of starvation because she refused
to eat any more than the French resistance fighters, who were living
underground at the time, Weil thought of her activism in mystical terms,
She spoke not of justice or power but of attention, which she defined as
“a point of eternity in the soul.” If we can pay attention closely
enough, she thought, we will come to know the transcendent, for it lies
at the center of the human heart and mind.

In terms of our story, if you practice paying attention thoroughly
enough you will see that cutting the cat in two is cutting the cat
in one-that because we are all different, we are all already one, So,
passionate as your views may be, you do not want to take sides and engage
in bitter disputes, Instead, you want to appreciate and understand and
weep with the suffering of the world, You want to intervene in disputes,
grabbing hold of the cat and saying to everyone, “Wake up, take a look,
Let’s take a look together, Let’s go beyond our differences and see
what we are really all about as human beings.” How to do this in the
midst of a particular situation is not always obvious, Maybe it takes
a great master like Nanchuan to have the nerve to do it, But maybe not,
Maybe we all have to learn to have that much nerve, getting up from the
meditation cushion to become involved in our world of twoness and manyness,
with the monk’s spirit of oneness.
