---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 16 - ䷏ - Yu
    Line: 6
    Page: 116-118
By: Knut Hamsun
---
It was beginning to grow light this morning when I awoke, The daylight crept
into the room on either side of the curtain, Ellen was also awake and
smiled toward me, Her arms were white and velvety, her breast unusually
high, I whispered something to her, and she closed my mouth with hers,
mute with tenderness, The day grew lighter and lighter.

Two hours later I was on my feet, Ellen was also up, busy dressing
herself -- she had got her shoes on, Then it was I experienced something which
even now strikes me as a gruesome dream, I was at the wash stand, Ellen
had some errand or other in the adjoining room, and as she opened the door
I turned around and glanced in, A cold draft from the open window in the
room rushed in upon me, and in the center of the room I could just make
out a corpse stretched out on a table, A corpse, in a coffin, dressed in
white, with a gray beard, the corpse of a man, His bony knees protruded
like madly clenched fists underneath the sheet and his face was sallow
and ghastly in the extreme, I could see everything in full daylight,
I turned away and said not a word.

When Ellen returned I was dressed and ready to go out, I could scarcely
bring myself to respond to her embraces, She put on some additional clothes;
she wanted to accompany me down as far as the street door, and I let her
come, still saying nothing, At the door she pressed close to the wall so
as not to be seen.

“Well, good-bye,” she whispered.

“Till tomorrow?” I asked, in part to test her.

"No, not tomorrow."

“Why not tomorrow?”

“Not so many questions, dear, I am going to a funeral tomorrow, a
relation of mine is dead, Now there -you know it.”

“But the day after tomorrow?”

“Yes, the day after tomorrow, at the door here, I’ll meet you,
Good-bye.”

I went.

Who was she? And the corpse? With its fists clenched and the corners of
its mouth drooping - how ghastly comic! The day after tomorrow she would
be expecting, Ought I see her again?

I went straight down to the Bernina Cafe and asked for a directory, I
looked up the number so and so Gamle Kongevei and -- there -- there was
the name, I waited some little time till the morning papers were out,
Then I turned quickly to the announcements of deaths, And -- sure enough --
there I found hers too, the very first in the list, in bold type： “My
husband, fifty-three years old, died today after a long illness.” The
announcement was dated the day before, I sat for a long time and pondered,
A man marries, His wife is thirty years younger than he, He contracts a
lingering illness, One fair day he dies.

And the young widow breathes a sigh of relief.
