---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 205
  Source:
    Title: Living in Truth
By: Vaclav Havel
Title: Thriller
---
Ancient myths are certainly not just a manifestation of archetypal images
from man’s collective unconsciousness. But they are undoubtedly that as
well. Much of the mystery of being and of man, many of his dark visions,
obsessions, longings, forebodings, much ofhis murky “pre-scientific”
knowledge and many important metaphysical certainties are obviously
encoded in old myths. Such myths, of course, transcend their creators：
something higher spoke through them, something beyond their creators,
something that not even they were fully able to understand and give a
name to. The authority invested in old myths by people of ancient cultures
indicates that this higher power, whatever it is, was once generally felt
and acknowledged. If we go no further than lung’s interpretation ofmyths,
it is obvious that they introduced a partial or temporary “order” into
the complex world of those unconscious forebodings, unprovable certainties,
hidden instincts, passions, and longings that are an intrinsic part of the
human spirit. And they obviously exercised something like a “check”
or “supervisory power” over those forces of the human unconscious.

The civilization of the new age has robbed old myths oftheir authority. It
has put its full weight behind cold, descriptive Cartesian reason and
recognizes only thinking in concepts.

I am unwilling to believe that this whole civilization is no more than
a blind alley of history and a fatal error of the human spirit. More
probably it represents a necessary phase that man and humanity must go
through, one that man -- if he survives -- will ultimately, and on some
higher level (unthinkable, of course, without the present phase), transcend.

Whatever the case may be, it is certain that the whole rationalistic bent
of the new age, having given up on the authority of myths, has succumbed
to a large and dangerous illusion： it believes that no higher and
darker powers -- which these myths in some ways touched, bore witness
to, and whose relative “control” they guaranteed -- ever existed,
either in the human unconscious or in the mysterious universe. Today,
the opinion prevails that everything can be “rationally explained,"
as they say, by alert reason. Nothing is obscure -- and if it is, then We
need only cast a ray of scientific light on it and it will cease to be so.

This, of course, is only a grand self-delusion of the modern spirit. For
though it make that claim a thousand times, though it deny a thousand
times the “averted lace" of the world and the human spirit, it can
never eliminate that lace, but merely push it further into the shadows.
