---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 465-466
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
  - Union-Identity=Moving At Will-The Miracle Of Flight
  - Union-Identity=Revelation-Authority-Infallibility=The Hierarchy of Powers
By: Huai Nan Tzû
Commentary: (This piece refers to) the beginning of the Kali Yuga.
---
When we arrive at the decadent age, we find that men dug into the
mountains for precious stones. They wrought metal and jade into
cunning vessels and broke open oysters in search of pearls： they
melted brass and iron; the whole of nature withered under the
exploitation. They ripped open the pregnant and slew the young,
untimely (in order to get skins and furs). The Chilin, as a result,
did not visit the land. They broke down nests and despoiled the birds
that had not lain, so that the phoenix no longer hovered around. They
drilled wood for fire： they piled up timber to make verandahs and
balustrades： they burnt forests to drive out game and drained the
waters for fish. In spite of this, the furniture at the service of the
people was not enough for their use, whilst the luxuries of the rulers
were abundant. Thus, the world of life partially failed and things
miscarried so that the larger half of creation failed of fruition. ...

(They) opened up irrigation channels, for their enrichment. They laid
foundations for their cities, so that they were munitioned. Captured
wild beasts were domesticated： thus, there was grievous rupture of
the Yin and Yang, and the succession of the four seasons failed.
Thunder-bolts wrought havoc, and hailstones fell with violence.
Noxious miasma and untimely hoarfrosts fell unceasingly, resulting in
atrophy and the failure of nature to bear abundantly. Luxuriant grass
and thick brushwood were cut down in order to get land.  They cut down
the jungle in order to grow ears of corn. The plants and trees that
died before germination, flowering and bearing fruit, were
innumerable. ...

In the course of time, the mountains and streams were divided into
boundaries and frontiers： censuses of the people were taken in order
to know the population of this place and that： cities were built and
moats and dykes dug： barriers were erected and weapons forged, for
defensive purposes： officials were created for the departments with
various robes and badges and with laws： they differentiated classes
and masses and distinguished the worthy from the vulgar： they
organized a system of reprimands and approbations, of rewards and
punishments. ...

The harmonious cooperation of Heaven and Earth, the evolution of
creation by the Yin and Yang depends on the spirit of man. Hence, when
there is an estrangement between the classes and masses or rulers and
the people, the very air of Heaven becomes noxious and disorganised：
when prince and minister are not in harmony, the crops in the fields
fail to ripen.
