---
By: Anne Dillard
Source:
  URL: https://www.brainpickings.org/2018/05/31/annie-dillard-sojourner/
  Locus:
    Date: 31 May 2018
  Source:
    Title: Teaching a Stone to Talk
---
If survival is an art, then mangroves are artists of the beautiful：
not only that they exist at all -- smooth-barked, glossy-leaved, thickets
of lapped mystery -- but that they can and do exist as floating islands,
as trees upright and loose, alive and homeless on the water. ...

A society grows, interlocked in a tangle of dependencies. ...

The mangrove island wanders on, afloat and adrift. It walks teetering
and wanton before the wind. Its fate and direction are random. It may
bob across an ocean and catch on another mainland’s shores. It may
starve or dry while it is still a sapling. It may topple in a storm, or
pitchpole. By the rarest of chances, it may stave into another mangrove
island in a crash of clacking roots, and mesh. What it is most likely to do
is drift anywhere in the alien ocean, feeding on death and growing, netting
a makeshift soil as it goes, shrimp in its toes and terns in its hair. ...

I alternate between thinking of the planet as home -- dear and familiar
stone hearth and garden -- and as a hard land of exile in which we are all
sojourners. Today I favor the latter view. The word “sojourner” occurs
often in the English Old Testament. It invokes a nomadic people’s sense
of vagrancy, a praying people’s knowledge of estrangement, a thinking
people’s intuition of sharp loss： “For we are strangers before thee,
and sojourners, as were all our fathers： our days on the earth are as
a shadow, and there is none abiding.

We don’t know where we belong, but in times of sorrow it doesn’t seem
to be here, here with these silly pansies and witless mountains, here with
sponges and hard-eyed birds. In times of sorrow the innocence of the other
creatures -- from whom and with whom we evolved -- seems a mockery. Their
ways are not our ways. We seem set among them as among lifelike props for
a tragedy -- or a broad lampoon -- on a thrust rock stage. It doesn’t seem
to be here that we belong, here where space is curved, the earth is round,
we’re all going to die, and it seems as wise to stay in bed as budge. It
is strange here, not quite warm enough, or too warm, too leafy, or inedible,
or windy, or dead. It is not, frankly, the sort of home for people one
would have thought of -- although I lack the fancy to imagine another. ...

The planet itself is a sojourner in airless space, a wet ball flung
across nowhere. The few objects in the universe scatter. The coherence of
matter dwindles and crumbles toward stillness. I have read, and repeated,
that our solar system as a whole is careering through space toward a
point east of Hercules. Now I wonder： what could that possibly mean,
east of Hercules? Isn’t space curved? When we get “there,” how will
our course change, and why? Will we slide down the universe’s inside arc
like mud slung at a wall? Or what sort of welcoming shore is this east of
Hercules? Surely we don’t anchor there, and disembark, and sweep into
dinner with our host. Does someone cry, “Last stop, last stop”? At
any rate, east of Hercules, like east of Eden, isn’t a place to call
home. It is a course without direction; it is “out.” And we are cast.

These are enervating thoughts, the thoughts of despair. They crowd back,
unbidden, when human life as it unrolls goes ill, when we lose control
of our lives or the illusion of control, and it seems that we are not
moving toward any end but merely blown. Our life seems cursed to be a
wiggle merely, and a wandering without end. ...

Whether these thoughts are true or not I find less interesting than
the possibilities for beauty they may hold. We are down here in time,
where beauty grows. Even if things are as bad as they could possibly be,
and as meaningless, then matters of truth are themselves indifferent;
we may as well please our sensibilities and, with as much spirit as we
can muster, go out with a buck and wing.

The planet is less like an enclosed spaceship -- spaceship earth -- than
it is like an exposed mangrove island beautiful and loose. We the people
started small and have since accumulated a great and solacing muck of soil,
of human culture. We are rooted in it; we are bearing it with us across
nowhere. The word “nowhere” is our cue： the consort of musicians
strikes up, and we in the chorus stir and move and start twirling our
hats. A mangrove island turns drift to dance. It creates its own soil as
it goes, rocking over the salt sea at random, rocking day and night and
round the sun, rocking round the sun and out toward east of Hercules.
