---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Disciplines and Spiritual Practice
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 167-177
  Source:
    Title: Open Mind, Discriminating Mind
By: Charles T. Tart
Title: Observations of a Mediation Practice
---
I had tried a little of various kinds of meditation years ago, with very
poor results. My main practice was concentrative meditation, trying to focus
just on the process of breathing, without thinking anything. My mind was too
active to be stilled from thinking for more than a few seconds at a time,
though, and I was too concerned with whether I was doing it correctly to
be able to relax into the process. This was quite frustrating.

Some years ago I became involved in Transcendental Meditation (TM),
which proved helpful on some levels but was ultimately unsatisfying. The
following fourteen years were exceptionally rich in psychological insight,
practice, struggle, and growth. They involved many years of practice of
selfobservation and self-remembering. Recently I have begun a new cycle
of meditation practice, which has been both fruitful and frustrating. In
this chapter I shall try an unusual experiment： I shall try to describe
my own meditation practice by actually beginning to meditate as I sit in
front of the word processor, interrupting the process to write descriptions.

This is ironic in a way, as one of the most common difficulties in
meditation for me has always been the appearance of fascinating thoughts
about how I would describe meditation ifI were writing about it. I have
always had to dismiss these as interruptions, but now the devil will get
his due.

Beginning

I began meditation with a minute or two devoted to settling my body down
to a comfortable, stable position that I can maintain for forty minutes
or so without wiggling around. Sitting in my desk chair in front of the
word processor is not my usual or optimal position, but it should be
solid and comfortable enough for this session.

I start to settle my body and turn my attention more inward. I am very aware
of sensations in my head and body. They are tense, “Go for it!" sorts of
sensations. There is a tightness around my head, as ifthe skull and brain
were pushing against my skin, as if they were hardened against the world,
and a tension in my neck and shoulders, a straining forward.

One of the by-products of my meditation practice is that I pay
more conscious attention to my psychophysiological state during my
everyday activities. Consequently I recognize this as an all too common
overexcitement that comes over me when I want to get something done. This
is a frequent body pattern ofmine, but since such physical tension is
rarely required to actually accomplish anything effectively, I regard it
as pathological： By analogy, I'm revving my engine when only a small
touch is required on the gas pedal. My level of activation is much too
high for the task at hand.

Even though writing about it has kept me from paying full attention to
this tension pattern, some attention has gone to it and it has relaxed
moderately. I say “it” because I didn't consciously choose to be this
tense, nor does it instantly go away ifl command it to. I generally find
that conscious attention to tension patterns in my body relaxes them fairly
quickly, though, even if I don't deliberately try to relax them. With more
attention to or full consciousness of a useless tension pattern, I naturally
perceive it as useless and relaxation comes pretty automatically. Now I
shall stop writing a minute and deliberately pay full attention. ...

The first effect of fuller attention is a deeper understanding of how
useless this tension is. Since useless tension is a dumb thing to have,
this is a little upsetting to my self-image as a smart and efficient
person. I know from past experience that insights that upset my self-image
tend to make me resist looking inward, but I‘ve also learned that
such defensiveness gets me nowhere. So I’ll just accept the feeling of
dumbness and again get on with paying full attention to settle my body
down for meditation.

Settling In

As I settle in a little more a specific component of the head tension
stands out more clearly. I am still wearing my glasses. Even though I have
closed my eyes, my eye muscles are still straining a little for "proper"
focus through my glasses. They have become conditioned to the touch of
the glasses upon my nose and ears.

I need my glasses to type. Since I don’t want to keep taking them on and
offI decide I will relax this sensation as much as I can and then ignore
it. This involves setting up a sort of“background" intention during
meditating. I won’t keep thinking about it all the time, but I‘ll
set up the intention to ignore this sensation, let the intention go, and
hopefully only have to give the intention a second or so of attention once
in a great while to keep it effective. I have spent a long time describing
the settling-in process and still haven’t gotten very fair. Such settling
down processes are common for me in starting a meditation session.

As I again close my eyes and go inward the tension sensations relax and
become a more general feeling of aliveness and awakeness, a pattern of
sensations that is more generally spread through my body. I take this as a
sign of success, for I have learned that this pattern means that the energy
that was being automatically expressed as tension is now available to me
for more conscious direction： I have acquired “fuel” to “burn”
in the way I want.

Opening my eyes and writing interrupts the settling-down process and takes
me back into the tension pattern. Rather than be upset about this I consider
it a necessary price to pay in order to get a real-time account of the
meditation experience. I have decided to bring mindfulness to this cycling
in and out of meditation and so make it a part of the meditation process
itself. Thus my process is not interrupted as deeply and I am settling
down in a cyclical pattern‘ a little deeper each time, rather than
settling down in a more linear pattern of steadily increasing relaxation.

Concentration Meditation

My plan is to practice concentrative meditation at first, putting my
attention as fully as possible on my breathing. I will feel the sensations
associated with my belly moving in and out as my breathing goes on
automatically. I will regard anything other than these sensations as
a distraction.

This definition of what is appropriate experience (feeling the sensations of
breathing) and what is not (anything else) is another of those intentions
that will work in the background ofconsciousness to influence the course
of the meditation process. I should not “fight” distractions-that
just gives them more energy. Instead I should gently drop them from the
focus of attention as soon as I become aware that I have drifted off.

I feel my body settling and relaxing. My breathing starts to become more
prominent among the mass of body sensations, and I gently give myself the
mind-set to gradually focus more and more on the motions of my belly, rather
than forcibly concentrate on it all at once. This gentleness feels right：
Being forcible in my intentions usually produces unnecessary tension.

The sensation/energy level is high throughout my body. I can feel my
pulse beating all through it, my arms are tingling (my intellectual
mind jumps in to “explain” that as a result of the activity of
typing -- my intellectual mind is addicted to explaining everythingl),
there is a constriction around my waist from my belt, a slight fullness
in my stomach from breakfast an hour ago. I don't want to push away any
of these nonbreathing sensations. I decide to be aware of them from the
pets'pectivc’ of the part ofmy belly that move; when [breathe Thus I put
more attention into my breathing without actively rejecting anything else.

I also decide that since this is still the initial settling-in period it
would be OK to loosen my belt, which I do. IfI had been more than five
minutes into this meditation I would regard loosening my belt as a kind
of “cheating," since I believe I should be as still as possible once
I've really gotten going. An older student of meditation who I respect
once stated that the first five minutes is usually the squirming period,
and I accept that.

I hear my wife, Judy, making a phone call just outside my study
door. I'm annoyed. She is interrupting my meditation. She should have more
consideration! She doesn’t know I’m meditating, of course, but she does
know I'm writing and that I don’t want to be interrupted. These thoughts
go on and on. Finally I call out to her, “Be quiet, I'm writing!“ A
long train of thoughts of annoyance with her, ofannoyance with myself for
being so petty, about how I ought to be able to be unaffected by such
distractions, and so on, follows.

This long-winded thought-diversion event is all too typical of meditation
for me when something external distracts me. I’ve learned that the
best thing to do at this point is to drop the whole thing and get back
to being focused on meditating.

Now I’ve focused on my breathing for a dozen breaths or so, with only
occasional distractions. (That I can say “only occasional distractions”
represents tremendous progress for me.) I am getting into this meditation. I
can feel my body settling and relaxing more, with a kind of warm, heavy,
comfortable sensation enveloping it. I sense this in the awareness that
is peripheral to my primary focus on the sensation of my abdomen moving
in breathing.

My mind is focused on my breathing sensations, but it is also getting more
relaxed and contented. I’m getting deeper into my breathing. This warm,
comfortable feeling in mind and body feels very like the one that occurs
when I'm falling asleep. My meditation experience of these last months is
that this is an almost certain indication that in a moment I am going to
drift off into some hypnagogic fantasy and so totally lose my focus on my
breathing for a period that might be moments or minutes in length. Since
I don’t think falling asleep into hypnagogic fantasies is the purpose
of concentrative meditation, I must increase my level of alertness. In
this case the desire to open my eyes and record this event is a very
convenient way to increase my alertness, although I lose awareness of my
breathing and stop meditation for the time it takes to write this.

An aside： Note that if I could learn to hover continuously at this
point between clear focus on my breathing and starting to fall asleep,
I would like it a lot. The pleasant body sensations, the calmness, the
forgetting of troubles are very enjoyable. If my ordinary consciousness
was usually a state of agitation and worry, I would regard this kind of
meditative experience as a real “high” and use words like “peace,”
"bliss," and “tranquility” to describe it. Since I usually enjoy my
ordinary state of consciousness, however, I find this particular aspect
of meditation experience pleasant but not all that worthwhile; I want
much more than that, so I don’t want to learn to just hover there.

Seductive Thoughts

Meditating again. For several breaths in a row I was calmly and strongly
focused on my breathing. Suddenly I find that I am all wrapped up in a
fascinating train of thought about how I might connect the two telephone
lines running into the house together so that I could have conference
calls with three people, whether this would damage the telephone system,
how to try it using a resistor to test without allowing damage, where to
mount the switch box tor connecting the lines, and so on. I have been
on this thought line for somewhere between thirty seconds and a minute
or so. It has been a combination of thoughts and mild-intensity image --
not as intense as hypnagogic imagery, but vivid enough in its own way. I
don’t know when I lost track of my breathing. That’s my biggest problem
with concentrative meditation： I seldom know when a thought is taking
me away from concentration.

I love my thoughts. Almost every thought seduces me, charms me, casts its
spell over me. It’s as if I'm doing something boring when a beautiful
woman walks in front of me, smiles, and beckons me to come with her. I
instantly forget what I was doing. With a feeling of happiness and
anticipation I automatically follow my enchantress. Every step of this
journey is interesting, every step promises more pleasure with the next
step, and on I go. When the part of my mind dedicated to meditating finally
reactivates enough so I realize I have gone away on an enchanted journey,
I suddenly reappear, the enchanted landscape fades. The mindful, present
part that I call “I” is so real, so vivid at this moment, compared
to the enchanted mind that I usually wonder, “Where have I been?n The
real part of me exists now but it was gone, totally gone, disassembled,
scattered to the breeze, under a fairy enchantment.

This part of meditation experience remains the biggest puzzle to me. I am
so real, so vivid, when I am mindfully present, whether in concentrative
meditation or insight meditation. During this existence as a vivid mindful
I, I cannot conceive of giving it up voluntarily, ofdisappearing. Yet it
happens all the time. Most of my life is spent on an enchanted journey
in the Land of Thought and Fantasy, where this most real kind of“l”
does not exist.

Back to meditation practice. I spend several minutes trying to re-center
my awareness on my breathing. Miscellaneous thoughts come and go. Body
sensations appear and disappear. A slight itch on my scalp appears,
disappears, reappears, becomes very prominent, and “tempts” me： “I'm
distracting you, there might be a real reason for this itch, like a bug or
something, why don‘t you scratch me so I’ll go away permanently? My
background intention to ignore distractions and sit still is not enough
and I have to remind myself, in the foreground of my attention that I
am not going to scratch this itch. I’ast experience reminds me that
it will indeed be very satisfying if] scratch this itch, but a dozen new
itches will spring up to replace it, each further tempting me to scratch
it “one last time so you can settle down." Forget scratching the itch,
go back to my breathing.

Now I have become sleepy. My mind drifts a lot. I seldom follow my
breathing for more than a breath or two before drifting off on some
train of thought. I want to focus, so I modify my concentration practice
to try to compensate for excessive sleepiness： I begin counting each
breath. I think “one” through the first inhalation and exhalation
sensations, “two” through the next, and so on up through “ten,”
where I start again at “one.” Since my automatic mind is addicted to
thinking something, this is sort of an intellectual sop to it： Here,
you can keep track of the count.

This is often, although not invariably, helpful. It doesn’t help if
I’m very sleepy. It is also somewhat tricky. I want the counting to be
a secondary activity that helps me focus on the breathing sensations, but
it is easy for the counting to become primary, with little attention on
breathing. I have to monitor the balance of my attention： Is the actual
sensation of my abdomen moving still primary? If not, make it primary.

This brings me to a constant problem I have with concentrative
meditation. It seems to me that the point seems to be to become totally
absorbed in the object of concentration -- in this case, breathing. Every
other sensation, thought, feeling, and so on, other than the concentration
object, should cease to exist for the meditator with this degree of total
absorption. But in my experience, moments when I start to become totally
absorbed in my breathing, with everything else fading away, have always
turned out to be moments when I either fell asleep or became enchanted by
some thought train. When I am totally absorbed a dullness of mind occurs,
and there is nothing or no one left to notice that I’m about to lose
the concentration I do have.

I have not satisfactorily dealt with this conflict. Sometimes during
concentrative meditation I think I should just keep trying to be totally
focused and hope that someday a novel state of total absorption in my
breathing that isn’t falling asleep or being enchanted by a thought
will occur. At other times it seems perfectly clear to me that you cannot
literally be totally absorbed in the object of concentration. At least 1
percent has to be devoted to detecting the approach of a seductive thought
or the sensations announcing that sleep is coming, and then initiating
action to preserve the 99 percent concentration on the breath. I am
inclined toward the latter view now, given my experience to date, but the
idea of total absorption seems to be so clearly stated in the meditation
literature that I remain open to the possibility that my understanding is
quite incomplete. For the present I try to stay about 90 percent focused
on my breathing and let the other 10 percent of my mind monitor my state
and make little adjustments now and then.

Vipassana： Mindfulness Meditation

Usually I meditate for forty minutes. I devote the first twenty to
concentration on my breathing, as described above, and the second twenty
to vipassana, mindfulness meditation. I like to feel that I have gotten
somewhere with the concentrative meditation before switching over when my
timer sounds. “Gotten somewhere" I now take as a criterion of at least ten
breaths in a row where most of my attention was on my breathing and this
attention was continuous, that is to say that even if part of my attention
wandered elsewhere at least some part ofit stayed aware of the abdominal
sensations of breathing all the time. (This criterion of ten breaths is
a major achievement for me.) If my concentrative meditation hasn’t met
this criterion I will do it more “forcibly” (even while trying to
keep my concentration relaxed) toward the end of the first twenty minutes,
or even continue into the mindfulness period until I’ve achieved it.

So now the particular form of mindfulness meditation I usually practice
begins. My goal is to be completely attentive to whatever physical
sensations come along. As a sensation arises in my body I will pay attention
to it. I won't try to create or reject any particular sensations. I will
pay attention to the sensation as it persists or changes. When it goes away
by itselfI let it go and turn my full attention to whatever replaces it.

I close my eyes. My attention broadens out from my abdomen, where it was
focused in concentrative meditation, moving out to encompass my whole
body. I notice a tightness in my head that I wasn’t aware of a moment
before, but which feels like a familiar tension pattern. Some ofit is
jaw and temple tightness, which partly relaxes as I perceive it more fully.

I recall that I’m not focusing on what's happening in my body in order
to relax it or make it feel better; I’m just focusing on whatever is
there. Ifit relaxes and feels better, that's fine. Ifit doesn’t relax,
that’s also fine. My goal is to sense it completely and follow whatever
happens by itself, not control it.

My mind fills with a sensation of “vibration” through my whole
body. “Vibration” seems a grandiose sort of word, maybe tingling
would be better. My intellectual mind cuts in： “Is this an important
feeling? A useful sensation?” Realizing I’m not here to think about
my sensations in this meditation, I let the thought go. Fortunately,
I feel, it goes readily, without generating more thoughts.

More subtly my intellect slips in the thought, “But you should relax the
obvious tensions; after all, you meditate to break through to profound
experiences. You’ve felt muscle tension and tingling a million times
already and they get in the way of the real experience, so take just a
moment to deliberately relax and clear your mind." The thought catches
me, and before I can think again about the purpose ofmy meditation I
deliberately relax my body. The idea seems so sensible, after all. Then
again, practically all the thoughts that distract me from meditating seem
so sensible.

Well, I have relaxed, there’s no point getting further distracted in
thinking about whether I should have relaxed, so I‘ll just go back to
sensing Whatever sensations there are in my body.

“But remember that important, enjoyable phone call you want to remember
to make to your friend?" whispers my intellect. Later. Back to sensing.

A sensation of fullness in my stomach fills my mind. As I watch it awareness
of breathing through my whole chest and abdomen takes over. Then this
fades and the tension in my temples becomes prominent again. But I am
doing it： I am following the natural play of sensation.

Expectations

My mind makes an interesting observation. After stopping to write the
above paragraph I again close my eyes and automatically go back to the
sensations in my head that were there when I stopped. I can’t believe I
really put the body’s processes on “hold,” since sensations usually
change rapidly by themselves. Obviously my expectation that I should take
up where I left off for the sake of this writing has influenced where
my attention goes when I start again. Even though the intention wasn’t
conscious it played its part. How much do such background intentions and
expectations guide all of meditation, even when I am supposedly being
completely open to whatever happens by itself?

I hear the humming of the fans that cool my word processor, I feel a tingling
in my body that seems to be associated with the humming. I frequently notice
that the distinction between “outside sensations” and “inside”
sensations of events in my body is not always that clear. Sounds and the
like usually generate some distinctly localized and specific feelings
somewhere in my body. The humming of the fans spreads through my torso,
for example, as well as in a narrow, tubular channel running from each ear
down into my torso. A heavy, distant rumbling sound, presumably from some
distant truck, is associated with a delicate vibration in the central
part of my neck. An airplane sound is like a ball of vibration in the
bottom part of my neck.

My intellectual mind would like to construct an encyclopedia, a master map
of just where every kind of sound vibrates in my body. Not now, though：
I’m trying to meditate, not think up conceptual schemes. I don’t
want to build up expectations that sound X always is felt in body part
Y, and so on. I’m here to fully experience the natural flow of things,
not try to pin it down in some scheme. My seductive thoughts -- so full of
interest and implied promise -- are my major distractions to being mindful
of my body sensations. The kind of mindfulness, meditation that calls
for watching one’s thoughts is almost impossible for me at this stage.

A small burp. I retaste the sandwich I had for lunch. It is
enjoyable. “Ugh!” says the intellectual part of my mind, “What would
someone think if they read that? How will you maintain any dignity? When
are you going to have some interesting and uplifting experience to report,
anyway?" I can get into an intellectual argument with myself about this,
but it's better to just drop it and get on with meditating.

I regard drifting off into thought as a failure of my meditation： I
already know what thinking is like and how I can drift with it. So I
shall meditate without writing for a few minutes until a different kind
ofexperience occurs. Although it doesn‘t sound intellectual/y convincing
I must report that it is pleasing, at some level of my mind, to just
clearly follow sensation after sensation. I am a very clear part of my
consciousness while doing this and that's relaxing and gratifying. You will
probably have to experience this yourself to fully understand what I mean.

Pleasure and Pain

Now I have a kind Ofexperience that is just beginning to happen to me. I
slip into thinking about a novel I am reading, thinking how I would enjoy
sitting on the living room couch with the sun shining on me, savoring the
strange imagery of the novel. Although I am fairly (but not completely)
lost in the thought, I notice that my body makes preparatory adjustments
to get up and go read the novel, and that there is a feeling ofenjoyment
in my body at the anticipation of reading the novel.

Shinzen Young has told me that deep mindfulness meditation allows a
realization that mental pleasures involve a pleasurable sensation in some
part of the body, but this is one of the first times I have actually had
some direct experience of this. What would happen ifI looked even more
directly at that pleasurable sensation in the body? What is behind pleasure?

Odd. I wanted to add, “What is behind pain?" as the last sentence of the
previous paragraph but I stopped myself, thinking I wasn’t experiencing
any pain at the moment, so it wasn’t representative of my ongoing
experience to discuss pain, and it sounded too grandiose anyway. So
I closed my eyes to go back to meditating by being mindful of my body
sensations, and a second later I felt a sudden sharp pain in the ball of
my left foot, like something had jabbed me. It was too fleeting to focus
on closely. Perhaps it was a coincidence; or perhaps it resulted from
the intentional set produced by thinking about pain, with a little help
from some part of my mind then producing pain so I would be justified in
reflecting on and writing about it. I hope it will return and last as I
shut my eyes again and turn inward. I shouldn’t be hoping for anything
in particular, ofcourse, ifI‘m going to do this meditation properly.

Pain is quite interesting, depending on its intensity. In my experience to
(late a mild pain coming along gives me "energy." IfI have been drowsy
it wakes me and helps me feel clearer. Ifl have been drifting offinto
thoughts a mild pain brings me back to my body. Then I can focus on the
mild pain and it often becomes an interesting sensation instead of pain.

Some pains are more difficult to deal with, especially if they are the
kind that seem to carry the inherent message, “This pain may represent
a real problem, not just a painful sensation, so quick, move this part of
your body and you‘ll feel more comfortable and prevent real damage!" I
usually move automatically on these thoughts, and only afterward realize
that most of these are not real dangers of any sort. My biological instincts
to avoid pain are very strong and usually overcome my conscious decision
to sit still and experience what is.

Awareness

I now notice that although I have not been thinking much, I haven’t been
very clearly present to sensation either. I‘ve moved toward that pleasant
but dull near-sleep state I described earlier. I don't want to be here. It
is far more satisfying, in my experience, to be alert and relaxed in this
meditation. Indeed the snatches of that simultaneously relaxed and alert
state that come along are my main reward for doing mindfulness meditation.

Now, as in other meditation times, I reach a fairly quiet state of mind,
following sensations for halfa minute or so at a time before being
distracted by a thought. I get intrigued with trying to follow or focus
on my attention itself. What is it that is aware?

At first this makes me more aware of sensations of tension inside my head
and in the back ofmy neck. But this does not satisfy me. Yes, I remember
that I'm trying to focus on whatever is but I want something more than this,
I want to “get behind" ordinary mind; I expect something unusual to happen
but I don't know what that is. Surely “I,” my basic awareness, is more
than sensations of tension in my head? I reach some kind of barrier here
that frustrates going beyond it. Or perhaps the idea that I must go beyond
what is to something else creates the very barrier that frustrates me? This
is one of the most interesting and frustrating aspects of my mindfulness
meditation to date, the place where I am stuck. I go back to just observing
whatever sensations there are, but with a feeling that someday I’ll get
around that "barrier," I’ll find out something. So I end this meditation.

Satisfaction

Given the expeCtation I brought to the practice of meditation when I
first started years ago, this observation of my practice should strike
me as examples of frustration. Nothing spectacular is happening, nothing
obviously “spiritual.” No visions, no revelations.

Yet I look forward to my next meditation period. There is a quiet
satisfaction inherent in the moments ofconcentration and mindfulness in
both the concentrative and mindfulness meditation practices that is very
fulfilling. I usually meditate in the late afternoon, after I finish
working, and most days I start anticipating the pleasure of meditation
by early afternoon.

I am not very concerned about doing it “right” now, but somehow I
suspect that by being less concerned about how I meditate I am indeed
doing it better.

Ending Meditation Practice

My timer goes off, my formal meditation period is over. I feel relaxed
and calm. I can destroy this feeling quite quickly ifI overstimulate my
mind with too many concerns of no real importance in the long run (this
is called being normal), but I decide I will carry this calm, centered
feeling with me into my daily activities.
