---
By: Harada Tangen Roshi
Title: The Depth of Truth is Bottomless
Source:
  URL: "https://buddhismnow.com/2018/03/23/\
    the-depth-of-truth-is-bottomless-by-harada-tangen-roshi/"
  Locus:
    Date: 23 March 2018
  Source:
    Description: Teisho given by Harada Tangen Roshi
    Locus:
      Year: 2000
---
I cannot stress enough to you the absolute importance of sticking to
your practice no matter what. No adjustment is required; no calculation
is needed. I went through the same thing that you are going through now,
so I can tell you from personal experience what you must do. You must
give your life to this, and refuse to let anything - any thoughts, ideas,
attitudes - get in your way. Your ‘yes’ must be open. Your resolve
must be like steel. Even though some people seem to be blessed and joyous,
that doesn’t mean that they have true peace of mind, or that you would
have true peace of mind in those circumstances, not deeply, not really. So
ask yourself： Are you really going to be all right, no matter what?

There is a stone here in the graveyard upon which these words are
carved： ‘We were once just as you are now. You will become as we are
now.’ How is that? The fact is, everyone passes on. Impermanence is
swift. No matter how blessed you may feel in your present circumstances,
how easy-going, how secure and pleased you are, you cannot hang on to that
world. It will be jerked out from under you. Impermanence is swift. The
lining of your present life is death. The problem of life and death is
no one else’s problem; it is yours to deal with. And then there are the
many desires. You can’t get what you want; it never seems quite right,
never enough. Dissatisfaction and frustration seem to surface. There are
so very many people who worry about what would seem to be no problem at
all. Liberation from suffering. The more you know of this world, the more
you see it to be a giant exhibition of suffering. Everywhere you look,
you see plenty of examples of misery.

What about you? Have you no pain, no suffering, no worries, no fears? If
you honestly think： ‘Hey, not me. I can meet it as it comes, go with
the flow. I am not afraid; I can always be at peace,’ then you are
fooling yourself, giving yourself license, seeing yourself for what you
are not. You are caught up in a ‘self’ notion, clinging to an ego
idea. And lost in that ‘self’, you cannot hear the cry or see the
tears of others. If you can overlook those tears, you are not a person
of great peace of mind.

The depth of truth is bottomless. Your interconnection is bottomless. A
single grass in the field is perfect Buddha. How utterly ONE are all
things： the grasses, the trees, the great earth, the great sky. All
being is born in relation to all things. This is the true self, the
perfect self. No matter what, all is goodness. However, because of deluded
perception, beings fail to realise their inherent Buddha-nature. Truth
is universal and complete. Can you receive and embrace thoroughly this
one truth?

There is something urging you to look deeper, something which seeks to
be known. Don’t you see it yet? Isn’t it clear yet? You are sitting
here because you cannot help but seek truth. The genuine seeks to know
itself. Truth is seeking truth. That is why you are here, putting your
heart and soul into meditation. Your time of awakening will come. No one
is hopeless. Life is not mean. No one is left out. There is no one who is
more or less Buddha than any other. True nature is never lost, never hidden
from you. It only seems that you have to go looking for it. But you have
had long lifetimes of fooling yourself, protecting self-cherishing. When
you come to life again, to awakening, it will be so clear that there is
no ‘self’ and no ‘other’. There is no opposition; there is just
this one reality. What appears as opposition is simply the result of a
self-centred view, which is of course an incorrect view. This bad habit
and wrong view causes untold suffering for yourself and others. And you
will continue to create suffering as you go on living in falsehood. You
will continue to experience suffering, fear, a sense of lack, and you will
not be helping anybody.

What you think you are, who you think yourself to be is so entirely
mistaken. By grasping ‘self’ you obviously fail to see who you really
are. You try to hold what cannot possibly be held, for where is there
anything fixed? Change is swift. Because you try to hold on, you feel
much anxiety; it’s inevitable. In those circumstances, how could you
know true satisfaction? Dissatisfied, you look restlessly over here, over
there. Your base camp is ‘I, me, mine.’ You grasp it, you seek to rely
on it, but you are relying on a phantom. You grasp this phantom-self and
ceaselessly try to satisfy it. What lengths we go to, in order to gratify
the self! We get what we want for a time and then we lose it, up, down,
up and down. We try to rely on our clever thinking. How could there be
any true peace of mind? How could you even begin to give to the great
universe as you receive? Your compassion could only remain half-baked,
locked as you are in ‘I, me, mine’. If you are doing your practice
because you have determined to receive life as it is, to come home to life,
then you will meet true self.

We human beings rely on our discriminating intellect. How arrogant we
are! ‘This is mine; this is what I deserve; credit should come here;
this is the way it should be.’ We compare and contrast, and in so doing
shrink our world to something very small. We get so down on ourselves, feel
so very sorry for ourselves. Or, in turn, we are proud of ourselves. We
wonder why the world doesn’t turn as we think it should. We become so
dark and down, and then we joke in order to cover our insecurities. Lost
in ‘self’ we can’t help wondering： ‘Where is the value of this,
what am I doing this for?’ We wonder if there is any meaning in what
we are doing.

What about you? Are you clear, crystal clear about what you are doing? What
are you living for? Birth, ageing, illness and death come quick. Your
world as you know it, is pulled out from under you in a flash.

It seems like no time at all since I first met my teacher, Daiun Roshi. I
could only judge the world then by my own deeply held beliefs. To see
the beauty, we have to break through such beliefs. Some fifty-five years
have flashed by since then. And now, here, the universe is embraced in the
One. I can assure you that all is well. All eternity is now, here. Bold,
clear, dignified. Now, here, it is so vivid, so alive, so filled with joy,
and waiting for you to see it. ‘I will do whatever I can to benefit
others.’ This is just life as it is, naturally. Please, please see it：
everything is alive. Great, greatly alive. This is the happiness of all
happiness. And this ‘now here’ can never be destroyed. The light of your
eternal life is shining brightly, now. What joy there is in this radiance!

Please, take care of yourself, your shining Buddha-self. Become for
evermore able to appreciate your Buddha-self. That is not to say you
become arrogant. There is no one to feel small, no one to be made small,
no one to feel superior, no one toward whom you could feel superior. Who
are you to feel vain and proud when your very source is all being? You are
supported, you are nurtured, you are guarded by all being. Thanks to all
being, together, one, is the universe. This breath is breathed, so close,
always one, always together. Please never forsake the limitless treasure
which is you yourself. Be in touch, simply do not look away. Grasp nothing,
hold nothing. There is just now, here, fresh, new, alive. Just do your
practice with good grace.
