---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 793
Tags:
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=Sanâtana Dharma
  - Sacrifice-Death=Separation-Sin=Anatomy of the Fallen State
  - Sacrifice-Death=Sacrifice and Suffering
  - Union-Identity=Mysterium Magnum=Exoterism and Esoterism
By: William Law
---
The Christ of God was not then first crucified when the Jews brought Him to the
cross; but Adam and Eve were His first real murderers; for the death which
happened to them in the day that they did eat of the earthly tree was the death
of the Christ of God or the divine life in their souls. For Christ had never
come into the world as a second Adam to redeem it, had He not been originally
the life and perfection and glory of the first Adam. ...

All the shadows and types, sacrifices and ceremonies of the Jewish religion
were only so many ways of applying the benefits of Jesus Christ to that people.
‘Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.’ is the same in and
through all ages： He was the Saviour of Adam, the patriarchs, and the Jews,
just as He is our Saviour. His body and blood, offered in their sacrifices, was
their atonement, as it is ours, offered upon the cross. His flesh and blood was
meat and drink or a principle of life to them, as it is to us. ... God so loved
man. when his fall was foreseen, that He chose him to salvation in Christ
Jesus before the foundation of the world. ... Therefore, when Jesus Christ came
into the world, declaring the necessity of a new birth to be owned and sought
by a baptism into the name of Father. Son and Holy Ghost; this was not a new
kind or power of salvation, but only an open declaration of the same salvation
that had been till then only typified and veiled under certain figures and
shadows, as He Himself had been. And men were called, not to a new faith in
Him, as then first become their inward life and light, but to a more open and
plain acknowledgement of Him, who from the beginning had been the one Life and
Light and only salvation of the first man and all that were to descend from
him.
