---
Source:
  Chapter: 3
  Copyright: 1999 University of California Press
  ISBN: 0520219724
  Page: 70
  Title: The Bodhidharma Anthology
  Translator: Jeffery L. Broughton
Tags:
  - return
  - compassion
Title: The Vow of Srimala
---
I from today until enlightenment
toward the precepts received
will not raise a thought of transgression.

I from today until enlightenment
toward those worthy of respect
will not raise a disrespectful thought.

I from today until enlightenment
toward all sentient beings
will not raise a hostile thought.

I from today until enlightenment
toward another's physical looks and external possessions
will not raise an envious thought.

I from today until enlightenment
toward internal and external dharmas
will not raise a thought of stinginess.

I from today until enlightenment
will not for myself receive animals or property
and whatever I do receive will be for ripening poor,
suffering sentient beings.

I from today until enlightenment
will not for myself practice the four methods
of bringing beings to the Buddhist path,
and for the sake of all sentient beings
will without a thought tainted by affection,
without a thought of having had enough,
without a thought of hindering,
embrace sentient beings.

I from today until enlightenment
if I see sentient beings who are
    lonely, gloomy, suffering from illness,
undergoing various kinds of difficulties and distress,
will never even temporarily forsake them.
I will necessarily desire to put them at ease
and will be indulgent with them
and enable them to drop off all their woes
Only afterward will I leave them.

I from today until enlightenment
if I see the various evil rules
involving the catching and raising of animals
and the breaking of the precepts,
I will never reject the beings doing it.
When it is within my power
and I see these sentient beings at various places,
if I should subdue them, I will subdue them;
if I should embrace them, I will embrace them.

I from today until enlightenment
will embrace the true Dharma
and never forget it and lose it.

By this true vow I will soothe immeasurable, limitless sentient beings.
By these good karmic roots in all rebirths may I attain true Dharma knowledge.

After I attain true Dharma knowledge, with an untiring mind
may I speak Dharma for the sake of sentient beings.

In embracing the true Dharma
may I set aside my life and property to protect the true Dharma.
