---
Title: Usnisa Vijaya Dharani Sutra / Purifying All Evil Paths
Commentary: Translated version of Master Buddhapala during the Tang Dynasty
---
Thus I have heard, at one time, the Bhagavan (World Honored One) was
dwelling in the city of Shravasti at the Jeta Grove, in the Garden of
the Benefactor of Orphans and the Solitary (Anathapindika), together
with his regular disciples of twelve hundred and fifty great Bhikshus
and twelve thousand Maha Bodhisattvas Sangha in all.

At that time the devas in Trayastrimsha Heaven were also having a
gathering in the Good Dharma Hall. Among them was a devaputra by the
name of Susthita who, together with the other great devaputras, was
frolicking in the garden and courtyard, enjoying in the supremely
wonderful bliss of heavenly life. Surrounded by devis they were
extremely happy - singing, dancing and entertaining themselves.

Soon after nightfall, Devaputra Susthita suddenly heard a voice in
space saying, "Devaputra Susthita, you have only seven days left to
live. After death, you will be reborn in Jambudvipa (Earth) as an
animal for seven successive lives. Then you will fall into the hells to
undergo more sufferings. Only after fulfilling your karmic retribution
will you be reborn in the human realm, but to a humble and destitute
family, while in the mother's womb you will be without eyes and born
blind."

On hearing this, Devaputra Susthita was so terrified that his hair
stood on end. Tormented and distressed, he rushed over to the palace of
Lord Sakra. Bursting into tears and not knowing what else to do, he
prostrated himself at the feet of Lord Sakra, telling Lord Sakra of
what had happened.

"As I was enjoying the frolic of dance and songs with the heavenly
devis, I suddenly heard a voice in space telling me that I had only
seven days left, and that I would fall into Jambudvipa after death,
remaining there in the animal realm for seven successive lives.
Following that, I would fall into the various hells to endure greater
sufferings. Only after my karmic retribution had been fulfilled would I
reborn as a human, and even then I would be born without eyes in a poor
and disreputable family. Lord of Heaven, how can I escape from such
sufferings?"

Lord Sakra immediately calmed his mind to enter Samádhi and made
careful observations. Instantly, he saw that Susthita would undergo
seven successive evil paths in the forms of a pig, dog, jackal, monkey,
python, crow and vulture, all feeding on filth and putrescence.

Having seen the seven future rebirth forms of Devaputra Susthita, Lord
Sakra was shattered and was filled with great sorrow, but could not
think of any way to help Susthita. He felt that only the Tathágata,
Arhate, Samyak-sambuddha could save Susthita from falling into the
great sufferings of evil destines.

Thus, soon after nightfall that very day, Lord Sakra prepared various
types of flower wreaths, perfume and incense. Adorning himself with
fine Deva garments and bearing these offerings, Lord Sakra made his way
to the garden of Anathapindika, abode of the World Honored One. Upon
arrival, Lord Sakra first prostrated himself at the Buddha's feet in
reverence, then circumambulated the Buddha seven times clockwise in
worship, before laying out his great Puja (offerings).

Kneeling in front of the Buddha, Lord Sakra described the future
destiny of Devaputra Susthita who would soon fall into the evil paths
with seven successive rebirths in the animal realm with details of his
subsequent retribution.

Instantly, the usnisa (crown of the head) of the Tathágata radiated
multiple rays of light, illuminating the world in all ten directions,
the light then returned, circling the Buddha three times before
entering His mouth. Then the Buddha smiled and said to Lord Sakra,
"Lord of Heaven, there is a Dharani known as the 'Usnisa Vijaya
Dharani'. It can purify all evil paths, completely eliminating all
sufferings of birth and death. It can also liberate all miseries and
sufferings of beings in the realms of hell, King Yama and animal,
destroy all the hells, and transfer sentient beings onto the virtuous
path."

"Lord of Heaven, if one hears this Usnisa Vijaya Dharani once, all the
bad karma incurred from his previous lives that should cause him to
fall into hells will be destroyed altogether. He will instead acquire a
fine and pure body. Wherever he is reborn, he will clearly remember the
Dharani - from one Buddhahood to another, from one heavenly realm to
another heavenly realm. Indeed, throughout the Trayastrimsha Heaven,
wherever he is reborn, he will not forget."

"Lord of Heaven, if someone at death's door recalls this divine
Dharani, even for just a moment, his lifespan will be extended and he
will acquire purification of body, speech and mind. Without suffering
any physical pain and in accordance with his meritorious deeds, he will
enjoy tranquility everywhere. Receiving blessings from all the
Tathágatas, and constantly guarded by devas and protected by
Bodhisattvas, he will be honored and respected by people, and all the
evil hindrances will be eradicated."

"Lord of Heaven, if anyone can sincerely read or recite this Dharani
even for a short period of time, all his karmic retribution which would
lead him to suffer in the hells, the animal realm, the realm of King
Yama and the hungry ghost realm, will be completely destroyed and
eradicated without leaving any trace. He will be free to go to any of
the Buddhas' Pure lands and heavenly palace; all gateways leading to
the Bodhisattvas' abode are open to him unobstructed."

After hearing the above discourse, Lord Sakra immediately appealed to
the Buddha, "For the sake of all sentient beings, may the World Honored
One kindly give a discourse on how one's lifespan can be lengthened."

The Buddha was aware of Lord Sakra's intention and his eagerness to
hear His discourse on this Dharani and so immediatelyproclaimed the
Mantra thus：

   "NAMO BHAGAVATE TRAILOKYA PRATIVISISTAYA BUDDHAYA BHAGAVATE.

   TADYATHA, OM, VISUDDHAYA-VISUDDHAYA, ASAMA-SAMA SAMANTAVABHASA-

   SPHARANA GATI GAHANA SVABHAVA VISUDDHE, ABHINSINCATU MAM. SUGATA

   VARA VACANA AMRTA ABHISEKAI MAHA MANTRA-PADAI. AHARA-AHARA AYUH

   SAM-DHARANI. SODHAYA-SODHAYA, GAGANA VISUDDHE. USNISA VIJAYA

   VISUDDHE. SAHASRA-RASMI, SAMCODITE, SARVA TATHAGATA AVALOKANI,

   SAT-PARAMITA, PARIPURANI, SARVA TATHAGATA MATI DASA-BHUMI,

   PRATI-STHITE, SARVA TATHAGATA HRDAYA ADHISTHANADHISTHITA MAHA-MUDRE.

   VAJRA KAYA, SAM-HATANA VISUDDHE. SARVAVARANA APAYA DURGATI,

   PARI-VISUDDHE, PRATI-NIVARTAYA AYUH SUDDHE. SAMAYA ADHISTHITE.

   MANI-MANI MAHA MANI. TATHATA BHUTAKOTI PARISUDDHE. VISPHUTA BUDDHI

   SUDDHE. JAYA-JAYA, VIJAYA-VIJAYA, SMARA-SMARA. SARVA BUDDHA ADHISTHITA

   SUDDHE. VAJRI VAJRAGARBHE, VAJRAM BHAVATU MAMA SARIRAM. SARVA

   SATTVANAM CA KAYA PARI VISUDDHE. SARVA GATI PARISUDDHE. SARVA

   TATHAGATA SINCA ME SAMASVASAYANTU. SARVA TATHAGATA SAMASVASA

   ADHISTHITE, BUDDHYA-BUDDHYA, VIBUDDHYA-VIBUDDHYA, BODHAYA-BODHAYA,

   VIBODHAYA-VIBODHAYA. SAMANTA PARISUDDHE. SARVA TATHAGATA HRDAYA

   ADHISTHANADHISTHITA MAHA-MUDRE SVAHA."

(This Usnisa Vijaya Dharani is the improved version with some additions
to the original Sanskrit transliteration)

Then the Buddha told Lord Sakra, "The above Mantra is known as the
'Purifying All Evil Paths' Usnisa Vijaya Dharani'. It can eliminate all
evil karmic hindrances and eradicate the suffering of all evil paths."

"Lord of Heaven, this great Dharani is proclaimed together by Buddhas
as numerous as eighty-eight kotis (hundred million) of the grains of
sand of the Ganges River. All Buddhas rejoice and uphold this Dharani
that is verified by the wisdom seal of the Maha Vairocana Tathágata.
This is because in the evil paths, to liberate them from painful
retribution in hell, animal and King Yama's realms; to deliver beings
facing immediate danger of falling into the sea of birth and death
(samsára); to assist helpless beings with short life spans and poor
fortune and to deliver beings who like to commit all kinds of evil
deeds. Moreover, because of its dwelling and being upheld in the
Jambudvipa world, the power manifested by this Dharani would cause all
beings in hells and other evil realms; those with poor fortune and
revolving in the cycles of birth and death; those not believing in the
existence of good and evil deeds and are deviated from the proper path,
to attain deliverance."

Again Buddha reminded Lord Sakra, "I now entrust this divine Dharani to
you. you should in turn transmit it to Devaputra Susthita. In addition,
you yourself should receive and uphold it, recite, contemplate and
treasure it, memories and revere it. This Dharani Mudra should be
widely proclaimed to all beings in the Jambu-dvipa world. I also
entrust this to you, for the benefit of all heavenly beings, that this
Dharani Mudra should be proclaimed.

Lord of Heaven, you should diligently uphold and protect it, never
letting it to be forgotten or lost."

"Lord of Heaven, if someone hears this Dharani even for just a moment,
he will not undergo karmic retribution from the evil karma and severe
hindrances accumulated from thousands of kalpas ago, that would
otherwise cause him to revolve in the cycles of birth and death - in
all kinds of life forms in the evil paths - hell, hungry ghost, animal,
realm of King Yama, Asuras, Yaksa, Raksasa, ghosts and spirits, Putana,
Kataputana, Apasmara, mosquitoes, gnats, tortoises, dogs, pythons,
birds, ferocious animals, crawling creatures and even ants and other
life forms. Owing to the merits accrued from hearing for a moment this
Dharani, once this very life is over, he will be reborn in the Buddha
lands, together with all the Buddhas and Ekajati-pratibaddha
Bodhisattvas, or in a distinguished Brahmin or Ksatriya family, or in
some other wealthy and reputable family. Lord of Heaven, this man can
be reborn in one of the above-mentioned prosperous and reputable
families simply because he has heard this Dharani, and hence be reborn
in a pure place."

"Lord of Heaven, even acquiring the most victorious Bodhimanda is a
result of praising the meritorious virtues of this Dharani. Hence, this
Dharani is also known as the Auspicious Dharani, which can purify all
evil paths. This Usnisa Vijaya Dharani is like a Treasury of Sun Mani
Pearl -pure and flawless, clear as space, its brilliance illuminating
and all-pervading. If any beings uphold this Dharani, likewise will
they be bright and pure. This Dharani is similar to the Jambunada gold
- bright, pure, and soft, can not be tainted by filth and well-liked by
all who see it. Lord of Heaven, beings who uphold this Dharani are just
as pure. By virtue of this pure practice, they will be reborn in the
good paths."

"Lord of Heaven, where this Dharani dwells, if it is written for
distribution, propagated, received and upheld, read and recited, heard
and revered, this will cause all evil paths to be purified; miseries
and sufferings in all hells will be completely eradicated."

Buddha again told Lord Sakra cautiously, "If someone could write this
Dharani and place It on the top of a tall banner, high mountain or in a
tall building or even keep It in a stupa; Lord of Heaven! If there are
Bhikshus or Bhiksunis, Upasakas or Upasikas, laymen or laywomen who
have seen this Dharani atop the above structures; or if the shadows of
these structures should fall on beings who come near to the structures,
or particles of dust from the written Dharani are blown onto their
bodies;

Lord of Heaven： Should the accumulated evil karma of these beings cause
them to fall into the evil paths such as realms of hell, animal, King
Yama, hungry ghost, Asura and other, they will all be spared from the
evil paths, and they will not be tainted with filth and defilement.
Lord of Heaven!

Instead, all Buddhas will bestow predictions (Vyakarana) onto these
beings who will never regress from the path to Anuttara-samyak-sambodhi
(complete enlightenment)."

"Lord of Heaven, let alone if one makes various offerings of flower
wreaths, perfumes, incense, banners and flags, canopies decorated with
gems, clothing, necklaces of precious stones, etc, to adorn and honor
this Dharani; and at major routes, if one builds special stupas to
house this Dharani, then most respectfully with palms together
circumambulates the pagoda, bowing and taking refuge, Lord of Heaven,
those who make such offerings are called the great Mahasattvas,
Buddha's true disciples, and the pillars of Dharma. Such stupas will be
regarded as the Tathágata's complete body sharira-stupa."

At that time, in the early part of the night, the ruler of the Hell
Realm - King Yama. came to the abode of the Buddha. First, using
various Deva garments, beautiful flowers, perfumes and other
adornments, he made offerings to the Buddha, then circumambulated the
Buddha seven times before prostrating himself at the feet of the Buddha
in reverence, saying, "I heard that the Tathágata was giving a
discourse in praise of upholding the powerful Dharani; I have come with
the intention to learn and cultivate it. I shall constantly guard and
protect those who uphold, read and recite this powerful Dharani, not
allowing them to fall into hell because they have followed the
teachings of the Tathágata."

At this time, the four Guardians of the world - the Caturmaharajas
(Four Heavenly Kings) circumambulated the Buddha three times, and most
respectfully said, " World Honored One, may the Tathágata kindly
explain in detail the way to uphold this Dharani."

The Buddha then told the Four Heavenly Kings, "Please listen
attentively, for your benefit as well as for the benefit of all beings
with short life spans, I will now explain the method to uphold this
Dharani.

On a full-moon day - the 15th day of the lunar month, one should first
bathe oneself and put on new clothes, uphold the profound precepts and
recite this Dharani a 1000 times. This will cause one to lengthen one's
lifespan, and be permanently free from the sufferings of illness; all
one's karmic hindrances will be completely eradicated. One will also be
liberated from suffering in hell. If birds, animals and other sentient
beings hear this Dharani once, they will never again be reborn in these
impure and gross body forms once their lives have ended."

The Buddha continued, "If someone from a serious disease hears this
Dharani, he will be free from the disease. All other illnesses will
also be eradicated, so too will the evil karma that will cause him to
fall into the evil paths. He will be reborn in the Land of Ultimate
Bliss after the end of his life. From then onwards he will no longer be
born from the womb. Instead, wherever he is reborn, he will be born
transformed from the lotus flower and would always remember and uphold
this Dharani and gain knowledge of his past lives."

The Buddha added, "If someone has committed all the severe evil deeds
before his death, according to his sinful deeds, he ought to fall into
one of these realms of hell, animals, King Yama or hungry ghosts, or
even into the big Avichi Hells, or be reborn as an aquatic creature, or
in one of the many forms of birds and animals. If someone could obtain
part of the skeleton of the deceased, and holding a fistful of soil,
chant this Dharani 21 times before scattering the soil over the bones,
then the deceased will be reborn in heaven."

The Buddha further added, "If one can chant this Dharani 21 times
daily, one is worthy of accepting all the immense worldly offerings and
will be reborn in the Land of Ultimate Bliss after one's death. If one
chants this Dharani constantly, one will attain Maha Parinirvana and be
able to lengthen one's lifespan besides enjoying the most extraordinary
bliss. After one's life is over, one will reborn in any of the
wonderful Buddha lands, in constant company of the Buddhas. All
Tathágatas will always give discourses on the profound and wonderful
truth of Dharma and all World

Honored Ones will bestow predictions of enlightenment upon one. The
light illuminating from one's body will pervade all Buddha lands."

The Buddha further explained, "To recite this Dharani, one should
first, in front of the Buddha's image, use some clean soil to construct
a square Mandala, the size according to one's wish. On top of the
Mandala one should spread different kinds of grass, flowers and burn
different kinds of quality incense. Then kneeling down with the right
knee on the floor, mindfully reciting the Buddha's name and with the
hands in the Mudrani symbol, (i.e. each hand bending the forefinger
before and pressing it down with the thumb and placing both palms
together before the chest) in reverence, one should recite this Dharani
108 times. The showers of flowers would rain down from the clouds and
would thus be universally made as offerings to Buddhas as numerous as
the grains of sand of eighty-eight million Ganges Rivers. These Buddhas
will simultaneously praise,

"Excellent! Rare indeed! A Buddha's true disciple! " One will instantly
attain Unobstructed Wisdom Samádhi and the Great Bodhi Mind Adorned
Samádhi. Thus is the way to uphold this Dharani."

The Buddha again exhorted Lord Sakra, saying, "Lord of Heaven, the
Tathágata uses this expedient means to deliver beings who would
otherwise have fallen into hells; to purify all evil paths and to
lengthen the life-spans of those who uphold this Dharani. Lord of
Heaven, please go back and transmit this Dharani to Devaputra Susthita.
After seven days, come to see me with Devaputra Susthita."

Thus, at the abode of the World Honored One, the Lord of Heaven
respectfully received this Dharani practice and returned to his
heavenly palace to convey it to Devaputra Susthita."

Having received this Dharani, Devaputra Susthita kept to the practice
as instructed for six days and six nights, after which all his wishes
were completely fulfilled. The karma which should have led him to
suffer in all the evil paths were all eradicated. He would remain on
the

Bodhi Path and increase his lifespan for an immeasurable period of
time.

Thus, he was extremely delighted, exclaiming aloud in praise,
"Extraordinary Tathágata! What a rare and wonderful Dharma! Its
efficacy explicitly verified! Rare indeed! Truly I have thus obtained
deliverance!"

When the seven days were over, Lord Sakra brought Devaputra Susthita,
together with other heavenly beings, respectfully bearing excellent and
wonderful adornment of flower-wreaths, perfumes, incense, jeweled
banners, canopies decorated with gemstones, Deva-garments and garlands
of precious stones, approached Buddha's abode and presented their grand
offerings. Using heavenly garments and various garlands of precious
stones to make offerings to the World Honored One, they then
respectfully circumambulated the Buddha a hundred thousand times, paid
homage to the

Buddha, then happily took their seats and listened to the Buddha preach
the Dharma.

The World Honored One then extended his golden arm and touched the
crown of Devaputra Susthita, to whom He not only preached the Dharma
but bestowed a prediction of Devaputra Susthita's attainment to Bodhi.

Finally, the Buddha said, "This Sutra shall be known as the 'Purifying
All Evil Paths' Usnisa Vijaya Dharani'. You should diligently uphold
it." On hearing this Dharma, the entire assembly was extremely happy.
They faithfully accepted and respectfully practiced it.
