---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 298-299
  Source:
    Title: Strength to Love
By: Martin Luther King, Jr.
References:
  - By: Thomas Carlyle
  - By: William Cullen Bryant
---
Is anything more obvious than the presence of evil in the universe? Its
nagging, prehensile tentacles project into every level of human existence. We
may debate the origin of evil, but only a victim of superficial optimism
would debate its reality. Evil is stark, grim, and colossally real. Within
the wide arena of everyday life we see evil in all of its ugly dimensions. We
see it expressed in tragic lust and inordinate selfishness. We see it in
high places where men are willing to sacrifice truth on the altars of their
self-interest. We see it in imperialistic nations crushing other people with
the battering rams of social injustice. We see it clothed in the garments of
calamitous wars which leave men and nations morally and physically bankrupt.

In a sense, the history of man is the story of the struggle between good
and evil. All of the great religions have recognized a tension at the very
core of the universe. Hinduism, for instance, calls this tension a conflict
between illusion and reality; Zoroastrianism, a conflict between the god of
light and the god of darkness; and traditional Judaism and Christianity,
a conflict between God and Satan. Each realizes that in the midst of the
upward thrust of goodness there is the downward pull of evil.

Christianity clearly affirms that in the long struggle between good and
evil, good eventually will emerge as victor. Evil is ultimately doomed
by the powerful, inexorable forces of good. Good Friday must give way to
the triumphant music of Easter. Degrading tares choke the sprouting necks
of growing wheat for a season, but when the harvest is gleaned the evil
tares will be separated from the good wheat. Caesar occupied a palace and
Christ & cross, but the same Christ so split history into A. D, and B. C,
that even the reign of Caesar was subsequently dated by his name. Long
ago biblical religion recognized what William Cullen Bryant affirmed,
“Truth crushed to earth will rise again," and what Thomas Carlyle wrote,
“No lie you can speak or act but it will come, after longer or shorter
circulation, like a bill drawn on Nature’s Reality, and be presented
there for payment -- with the answer, No effects.”
