---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 873-874
  Source:
    Title: St Matthew
    Locus: IV 1-11
Tags:
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Realization
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation='And Ye Shall Be as Gods'
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation=The False Light
Commentary: |
  Christ who had by nature what saints have by grace was obviously free
  (like Muhammad and the Buddha in the two citations that follow) from human
  imperfection; but as the Word made flesh and as the Way, it was inevitable
  that his temporal person be submitted to the ignominies visited upon man
  at this time in the world cycle. His perfection manifests in the way he
  surmounted his trials.
---
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of
the devil.

And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungred.

And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.

Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a pinnacle
of the temple.

And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down; for it is
written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee; and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord
thy God.

Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;

And saith unto him. All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
down and worship me.

Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him.
