---
Source:
  Translator: Edward Conze
Tags:
  - initiation
  - union
Title: The Heart Sutra
---
Homage to the Perfection of Wisdom, the Lovely, the Holy!

Avalokita, The Holy Lord and Bodhisattva, was moving in the deep course of
the Wisdom which has gone beyond. He looked down from on high, He beheld
but five heaps, and he saw that in their own-being they were empty.

Here, Sariputra, form is emptiness and the very emptiness is form;
emptiness does not differ from form, form does not differ from emptiness;
whatever is form, that is emptiness, whatever is emptiness, that is form,
the same is true of feelings, perceptions, impulses and consciousness.

Here, Sariputra, all dharmas are marked with emptiness; they are not
produced or stopped, not defiled or immaculate, not deficient or complete.

Therefore, Sariputra, in emptiness there is no form, nor feeling, nor
perception, nor impulse, nor consciousness; No eye, ear, nose, tongue,
body, mind; No forms, sounds, smells, tastes, touchables or objects of
mind; No sight-organ element, and so forth, until we come to： No
mind-consciousness element; There is no ignorance, no extinction of
ignorance, and so forth, until we come to： there is no decay and death, no
extinction of decay and death. There is no suffering, no origination, no
stopping, no path. There is no cognition, no attainment and non-attainment.

Therefore, Sariputra, it is because of his non-attainment that a
Bodhisattva, through having relied on the Perfection of Wisdom, dwells
without thought-coverings. In the absence of thought-coverings he has not
been made to tremble, he has overcome what can upset, and in the end he
attains to Nirvana.

All those who appear as Buddhas in the three periods of time fully awake to
the utmost, right and perfect Enlightenment because they have relied on the
Perfection of Wisdom. Therefore one should know the prajnaparamita as the
great spell, the spell of great knowledge, the utmost spell, the unequaled
spell, allayer of all suffering, in truth - for what could go wrong? By the
prajnaparamita has this spell been delivered. It runs like this：

Gone, gone, gone beyond, gone altogether beyond, O what an awakening,
all-hail!
