---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Disciplines and Spiritual Practice
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 180-181
  Source:
    Title: The Awakening of Kundalini
By: Gopti Krishna
Title: The True Aim of Yoga
---
Can you explain to yourself what or who you are? What is the nature of this
thinking, knowing, feeling entity in you which is conscious of the world
around it and which is never able to answer the question whence it came
and where it has to go.

Material progress is a preliminary step to spiritual awakening. In
every civilization of the past, when the smoke and dust of the battle and
struggles for supremacy died down, the eternal questions -- Who am I and
what is the mystery behind this creation -- began to agitate the more
intelligent and evolved individuals of the populace.

The answers furnished by wise men among the Egyptians, Babylonians,
Indo-Aryans, Chinese, Persians, Greeks, and Romans are still on record,
and it is obvious that it is only this restless hunger of the soul to
discover itself that has prompted most of man’s mental, artistic, and
scientific growth. In fact, at the beginning all knowledge originated from
the pressures exerted by the religious thirst in man. There is nothing so
erroneous as the opinions expressed by some scholars and men of science
that religious experience is a pathological condition of the brain or an
invasion from the unconscious. This irresponsible attitude destroys the very
foundation of the precious urge responsible for the progress of mankind.

Yoga aims to give these momentous questions answers which cannot be
furnished by skeptical denials, drug use, Asanas or mantras, breathing
exercises, or meditation without other moral virtues. In order to be
effective, Yoga must be practiced in the fullness of all its eight limbs
or branches. Everyone who aspires to the supreme experience must strive
for perfection; he must begin first with the development of his personality.

“I call him alone a Brahman, that is, a spiritually awakened person,"
says Buddha, "from whom lust, anger, pride, and envy have dropped offlike a
mustard seed from the point of a needle." Mere recitation of the well-known
mantra, “Om Mani Padme Om," popular among the Buddhists in Tibet, or
its rotation millions of times on prayer wheels, could not bear any fruit
in one who did not follow the other teaching of Gotma the Buddha. The
tragedy is that people do not often understand what “enlightenment”
or “self-realization" means. It is a colossal achievement.

According to the records available, all the men who had the genuine
experience through the whole course of history do not number more than
a few hundred. They are far fewer in number than the men of talent and
genius in all other branches of knowledge and art, but they created
the revolutions in thought which continue to affect the world to this
day. The spiritual-adept or religious genius is extremely rare for this
reason： “Illumination” represents a transformation of consciousness,
the opening of a new channel of perception within, by which the deathless
and boundless universe is opened to the vision of the soul.

Just as every atom of matter represents a unit of basic energy forming
the universe, every human soul represents a drop in an infinite ocean
of consciousness which has no beginning and no end. The average man,
oblivious to his own divine nature and unconscious of his own majesty,
lives in permanent doubt because of the limitations of the human brain. He
is overwhelmed by uncertainty and sorrow at the thought of death and
identifies himself with the body from the first to the last. He does not
realize that he has a glorious, unbounded, eternal existence of his own.

All the systems of Yoga and all religious disciplines are designed to bring
about those psychosomatic changes in the body which are essential for the
metamorphosis of consciousness. A new center -- presently dormant in the
average man and woman -- has to be activated and a more powerful stream of
psychic energy must rise into the head from the base of the spine to enable
human consciousness to transcend the normal limits. This is the final phase
of the present evolutionary impulse in man. The cerebrospinal system of
man has to undergo a radical change, enabling consciousness to attain a
dimension which transcends the limits of the highest intellect. Here reason
yields to intuition and revelation appears to guide the steps of humankind.

The syllable “aum” represents the music of the soul. This melody is
heard only when the Divine Power Center in man is roused to activity. Then
a sublime radiation floods the brain like a stream of golden nectar,
lighting what was dark before. As the luster spreads, the soul is filled
with an inexpressible happiness and finds itself growing in dimension,
extending outward like rays from the sun. It reaches all nearby objects,
then spreads to the distant boundaries, including the horizon and the
visible universe. There is no confusion or distortion as happens with
drugs and no loss of memory as happens in hypnosis. The intellect remains
unaffected, and there is no overlapping or aberration. The inner and outer
worlds stand side by side, but with one momentous dill le‘rence： From
a point of consciousness the soul now seems to stretch from end to end,
an ineffable and intangible intelligence present everywhere.
