---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXVI
    Page: 58
Title: That without full special grace, or long use in common grace, the
  work of this book is right travailous; and in this work, which is the work
  of the soul helped by grace, and which is the work of only God
---
And therefore travail fast awhile, and beat upon this high cloud of unknowing,
and rest afterward. Nevertheless, a travail shall he have who so shall use
him in this work; yea, surely! and that a full great travail, unless he have
a more special grace, or else that he have of long time used him therein.

But I pray thee, wherein shall that travail be? Surely not in that devout
stirring of love that is continually wrought in his will, not by himself,
but by the hand of Almighty God： the which is evermore ready to work this
work in each soul that is disposed thereto, and that doth that in him is,
and hath done long time before, to enable him to this work.

But wherein then is this travail, I pray thee? Surely, this travail is all
in treading down of the remembrance of all the creatures that ever God made,
and in holding of them under the cloud of forgetting named before. In this
is all the travail, for this is man’s travail, with help of grace. And the
tother above -- that is to say, the stirring of love -- that is the work of
only God. And therefore do on thy work, and surely I promise thee He shall
not fail in His.

Do on then fast; let see how thou bearest thee. Seest thou not how He standeth
and abideth thee? For shame! Travail fast but awhile, and thou shalt soon be
eased of the greatness and of the hardness of this travail. For although it
be hard and strait in the beginning, when thou hast no devotion; nevertheless
yet after, when thou hast devotion, it shall be made full restful and full
light unto thee that before was full hard. And thou shalt have either little
travail or none, for then will God work sometimes all by Himself. But not
ever, nor yet no long time together, but when Him list and as Him list;
and then wilt thou think it merry to let Him alone.

Then will He sometimes peradventure send out a beam of ghostly light, piercing
this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt thee and Him; and shew thee some
of His privity, the which man may not, nor cannot speak. Then shalt thou
feel thine affection inflamed with the fire of His love, far more than I
can tell thee, or may or will at this time. For of that work, that falleth
to only God, dare I not take upon me to speak with my blabbering fleshly
tongue： and shortly to say, although I durst I would do not. But of that
work that falleth to man when he feeleth him stirred and helped by grace,
list me well tell thee： for therein is the less peril of the two.
