---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 231
  Source:
    Title: Chuang-tse
    Chapter: VI
Tags:
  - Sacrifice-Death=Death=The Happy Death
  - 33
  - 978
  - 223
  - 949
  - 358
  - 910
  - 663
  - 488
Commentary: |
  A clear distinction is made here between the esoteric and exoteric
  paths, showing how the attitude may differ depending on the path. But
  Confucius reveals the wisdom of an esoteric path, while confessing
  further in the same passage that ‘I am one condemned by God' (in
  Wieger, p. 259, this reads, 'le Ciel m'a condamné à cette besogne
  massacrante') to follow the exoteric law.
---
Tsekung hurried in and said, ‘How can you sing in the presence of a
corpse? Is this good manners?’

The two men looked at each other and laughed, saying, ‘What should
this man know about the meaning of good manners indeed?’ Tsekung went
back and told Confucius, asking him, ‘What manner of men are these?
They can sit near a corpse and sing, unmoved. ... ’

\‘These men,’ replied Confucius, ‘play about beyond the material
things; I play about within them. Consequently, our paths do not meet,
and I was stupid to have sent you to mourn.1 They consider themselves
as companions of the Creator, and play about within the One Spirit of
the universe. They look upon life as a huge goiter or excrescence, and
upon death as the breaking of a tumor. How could such people be
concerned about the coming of life and death or their sequence? They
borrow their forms from the different elements, and take temporary
abode in the common forms, unconscious of their internal organs and
oblivious of their senses of hearing and vision. They go through life
backwards and forwards as in a circle without beginning or end,
strolling forgetfully beyond the dust and dirt of mortality, and
playing about with the affairs of inaction.  How should such men
bustle about the conventionalities of this world, for the people to
look at? . . . (They) are strange in the eyes of man, but normal in
the eyes of God. Hence the saying that the meanest thing in heaven
would be the best on earth; and the best on earth, the meanest in
heaven.’
