---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 101-103
Tags:
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Phantom Flux of Life
  - Beauty-Peace=Beauty=The Uncreate Source of Beauty
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Hold of Passion
  - Beauty-Peace=Peace=Serenity
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Snare of Woman
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
By: \'Attâr
Format: Verse
Commentary: |
  The ancient Egyptians had the wisdom to bury their gold in the form
  of funerary offerings intended for the next world： in this way the
  gold was consecrated spiritually and served at the same time to
  anchor or fix the 'barakah' of the civilization substantially, and
  thus help assure its stability and perpetuity. -- The Pharaoh
  mentioned later in the poem refers to a period of decline.
---
Oh ye who so long feeding on the Husk
Forgo the Fruit, and doating on the Dusk
Of the false Dawn, are blinded to the True：
That in the Maidân of this world pursue
The Golden Ball which, driven to the Goal.
Wins the World's Game but loses your own Soul：
Or like to Children after Bubbles run
That still elude your Fingers： or, if won.
Burst in Derision at your Touch： all thin
Glitter without, and empty Wind within.
So as a prosperous Worldling on the Bed
Of Death -- ‘Behold. I am as one,’ he said.
‘Who all my Life long have been measuring Wind,
And. dying, now leave even that behind’ --
This World’s a Nest in which the Cockatrice
Is warm’d and hatcht of Vanity and Vice：
A false Bazâr whose Wares are all a lie.
Or never worth the Price at which you buy：
A many-headed Monster that, supplied
The faster, faster is unsatisfied;
So as one. hearing a rich Fool one day
To God for yet one other Blessing pray.
Bid him no longer bounteous Heaven tire
For Life to feed, but Death to quench, the Fire.
And what are all the Vanities and Wiles
In which the false World decks herself and smiles
To draw Men down into her harlot Lap?
Lusts of the Flesh that Soul and Body sap.
And, melting Soul down into carnal Lust.
Ev’n that for which ’tis sacrificed disgust：
Or Lust of worldly Glory -- hollow more
Than the Drum beaten at the Sultan’s Door,
And fluctuating with the Breath of Man
As the Vain Banner flapping in the Van.
And Lust of Gold -- perhaps of Lusts the worst：
The mis created Idol most accurst
That between Man and Him who made him stands：
The Felon that with suicidal hands
He sweats to dig and rescue from his Grave,
And sets at large to make Himself its Slave.

For lo, to what worse than oblivion gone
Are some the cozening World most doated on.
Pharaoh tried Glory： and his Chariots drown’d：
Kârûn with all his Gold went underground：
Down toppled Nembroth with his airy Stair：
Schedâd among his Roses lived -- but where?

And as the World upon her victims feeds
So She herself goes down the Way she leads.
For all her false allurements are the Threads
The Spider from her Entrail spins, and spreads
For Home and hunting-ground： And by and bye
Darts at due Signal on the tangled Fly,
Seizes, dis-wings. and drains the Life, and leaves
The swinging Carcase, and forthwith re-weaves
Her Web： each Victim adding to the store
Of poison'd Entrail to entangle more.
And so She bloats in Glory： till one Day
The Master of the House, passing that way.
Perceives, and with one flourish of his Broom
Of Web and Fly and Spider clears the Room.
