---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 299-305
  Source:
    Title: The Dark Face of Reality
References:
  - Title: 2 Corinthians
    Locus: 4:4
By: Martin Israel
---
I have been repeatedly aware ofa realm or dimension ofreality that has
transcended but never occluded the material base of everyday existence. It
has usually been of solemn hue (ifone may be permitted to transcribe inner
emotional impressions into the symbols of colour), but occasionally sharply
accentuated around the atmosphere of certain individuals as a dark aura. I
have known intuitively, even as a child, that such people were unwholesome --
and sometimes a similarly unwholesome atmosphere has pervaded a house
in which they lived or even had visited for a short time. In childhood
I was aware of the terrible evil festering in Germany and the tortures
committed on Jews and others detested by the Nazi regime. The pain was at
times almost too severe to bear, but then an atmosphere of light penetrated
the gloom, and the path of hope was shown again. Faith was the prerequjsite
for traversing that path when the radiance waned and I was on the solitary
trail once more. In this gloom I was aware of presences whose origin I
could not define. Some were probably the unquiet spirits of the dead,
but a few had a darker, more forbidding emanation. These filled me with
terror, but by holding fast to God, whom I had known from an amazingly
early period of my childhood, I was supported and guided in this uncharted
terrain of dark radiance. All this is, as already stated, an essentially
private testimony, but the experience was to play an important part in my
later work in the ministry of healing and deliverance, especially after
I had submitted to the authority of the Church and received ordination as
a priest. Priestly orders were to confer on me a spiritual authority that
I lacked as a layman, even though I had been much involved in conducting
retreats and in the ministry of counselling and healing for quite a number
of years before I entered into the ordained ministry.

Almost at once, in my first parochial attachment, I was consulted by a
man of artistic temperament but employed in the financial world, who had
suffered from repeated bouts of severe depression which his doctors could
only partially control with drugs. He came to me in a state of near-suicidal
darkness, and suddenly I was aware of a malign presence overshadowing him. I
asked him whether anyone close to him had recently died, and was told
that, indeed, a colleague had just lost his life in distinctly unusual
circumstances, so that suicide could not be excluded. This colleague
had held a position of authority over the man, and had always behaved
tyrannically towards him, making his life at work a constant misery. One
would have expected his death to have come as something of a relief, but
instead the depression intensified to near-suicidal proportions. There
was certainly no question of grief for the dead man, nor any unresolved
feeling ofguilt about the unsatisfactory relationship in the past. It
came upon me as a thundering shock that the dead man was obsessing (or
infesting) the psyche of his sensitive colleague, with the intention of
driving him also to suicide. The evil of the situation was overwhelming. I
bade the “spirit” of the deceased one to depart forthwith into the
protective custody of God, and at once the suicidal depression lifted from
the sensitive man. He attained a balanced emotional frame very rapidly,
and was able to leave the church in a state of calm relief. It later
transpired that he was a natural sensitive, and he had to be instructed
in the proper control ofthe psychic faculty. The depression, it must be
admitted, did occasionally recur, but there was never again so terrible
an episode that suicide was threatened. He was above all now in control
of his life, and he subsequently left the world of finance for that of art.

This is a prototype example of the work that has subsequently been thrust
upon me. I have been , shown that bad relationships between parents
and their children do not automatically terminate with the death of the
former. On some occasions the “spirit” of the parent has hovered around
the child’s psyche and caused distress and even accidents, until once
more the unquiet deceased were kindly, but with uncompromising authority,
told to quit the earth-bound plane and move on to the greater life beyond
death, to that place that God in his infinite mercy had prepared for their
reception and healing. In some other instances, the disturbing entity has
been a sibling or a more distant relative. Sometimes a sibling who has died
in early childhood, even shortly after birth, has caused the disturbance. I
would emphasize that this type of situation is not common, at least in my
experience. I say this advisedly, lest a picture of the after-death state
be painted in which all the recently deceased “spirits” hang around
the living and cause unpleasant psychological disturbances. Fortunately,
this is the exception rather than the rule： the penitent departed move
to their apportioned place for further service and growth. We are accepted
by God’s grace, but we have to accept that grace whose full nature is
love. It cannot be thrust upon us in such a way that our own inviolate will
is outraged, a point not always appreciated by fervent revivalists who are
hell-bent on saving the souls of all unbelievers. Yes, indeed, their heaven
is too close to hell for the comfort of any perceptive individual, because
the power of private judgement is overwhelmed in a seething emotional
barrage of threats. The situation shades imperceptibly into the ways of
the dictators of our time. In respect of the very young who have died and
then obsessed the personalities of their siblings or other near relatives,
their problem seems to be one of ignorance or else resentment that their
lives have been cut short so summarily. In all these instances a Requiem
Mass said for the dead can help to settle their souls, but often a word
ofcommand is also necessary. This has, indeed, been my experience.

All this is to be clearly distinguished from the practices
ofspiritualism. Here there is a willed attempt to communicate with the
deceased through the agency of mediums, or sensitives. The impetus is
nearly always the need of those who are bereaved or the curiosity ofthose
dabbling in occult, potentially dangerous matters for the sake of new
experiences. The results of this type of attempted contact are seldom
satisfactory, since the issue is invariably clouded by the possibility of
fraud on the part of the medium or else unconscious telepathic contact with
the mind of the sitter. Even if what appears to be a genuine contact is
made, the communication is very likely to be coloured by the personality
ofthe medium. Furthermore, there is always the possibility ofinterference
by mischievous entities from the vast intermediate psychic realm, some
of which may well be of demonic nature. This is why willed communication
by the agency of mediums is to be deprecated. But the phenomenon of
mediumship is worthy of investigation by qualified research workers. These
may, at the very least, gain new insights into the range ofthe human
mind： the fruits ofthese studies are extensions of normal psychol0gy
(parapsychology). They shed new light on the mechanisms of life. Those who
depend on communication through mediums with their dead loved ones tend to
be drawn ineluctably into a prison of past associations which they then
project into the present. Instead of growing through loss into a life of
greater relationships with humanity at large, they remain stuck in past
attitudes. By not letting go of the past, they remain trapped in it,
and quite possibly restrict their loved ones on the other side of death.

The person who is naturally sensitive psychically is in possession of a
gift that is both serviceable to others and wounding to himself. It must
be used with reverence, and the call is from God, not man. Ifmediumship
is indeed a valid means of communication with deceased souls, its purpose
is to help those who are earth-bound on their journey to the light, and
the operative work is prayer. It is conceivable that such entities are
closer to the earth they once knew than to the “heavens” (using the
term in a collective sense rather than one of spiritual distinction)
they are to inhabit in their new form. And so their earthly helpers
may assist the greater communion of saints in liberating them from past
associations. Then the work is continued by that great communion, which
surely includes the ministry of angels too. Such a sensitive person is,
as I have already indicated from my own experience, vulnerable to the less
desirable influences of the intermediate dimension (between solid earth and
the heaven of the blessed departed), and needs constant protection. This is
afforded by a life ofhumble submission to God in prayer, worship, service,
and a chaste style of living. Furthermore, there should be unfailing prayer
support from a devoted community： religious orders have an important
place in this work, especially the contemplative communities whose life is
centred on prayer. In this way the psychic faculty is sanctified. In the
spiritualistic way it tends to be sensationalized, cheapened and brought
into ridicule, at least among people with intelligence and spiritual
discernment. All this is very sad, because the psychic mode is one of
intimate communication between people and between the divine and the human.

On some occasions I have been aware ofa powerful, more concentrated
and malign source of disturbance around a person who is in severe
difficulties. He may be aware ofa destructive force around him that
threatens his security, or there may be dangerous accidents, or simply an
atmosphere of general disquiet. In these circumstances I have had little
doubt that a demonic agency has been at work, rather than simply the
unquiet soul ofa deceased person. Sometimes the fallen angel, which is the
usual identity of the demonic presence, has attached itselfto a deceased
person, so that the two appear to work in collaboration. Occasionally a
decidedly evil deceased person may gain control over a neutral angelic
presence on the lower grades of the hierarchy and use it for destructive
purposes. All this, needless to say, is a purely private, subjective
judgement which follows a personal encounter with a focus ofevil. But
the course ofaction is the same -- to banish the entity, however it may
be described, from the reaches of the earth and despatch it to the place
in the greater world beyond death which God has prepared for it. It is
essential to direct the demonic entity to a place of reception and not
simply to leave it unattended in the darkness. Not only would this be
very unloving, but it could also leave the entity free to continue its
disturbing work among us all.

Some readers, disturbed enough by this account of obsessing demonic agents,
would raise their eyebrows in incredulous horror at the suggestion of
love being expended on such a vile entity. But we have, as Jesus once
taught us, to love our enemies, and not only those who are well-disposed
to us. Only the spirit of love can start the work of redemption. What
God has in store for his errant creatures-- remembering that he alone is
the universal creator-- is not our business, but it is surely not out of
place to look for a final healing of all that is aberrant and unclean,
whether human or angelic. Such must be the measure of divine love, of
which human sacrificial love is a reflection in our little world. Such
a universalistic hope does not in any way excuse, let alone overlook,
the evil of the creature, which is to be expiated in full measure. But
it can nevertheless envisage the sinner’s final repentance, absolution
and reception into the body of saints who are perpetually about their
Father’s business.

If we accept the thesis that there are agents of evil in the intermediate
psychic realm, whether discarnate humans or fallen angels, can we
postulate a personality of supreme evil, the devil? I believe we are
entitled to do so, even if we cannot define the nature of the ultimate
destructive power with precision. It may be a powerful fallen angel, or
demon, or else the summation of all the evil power that has accumulated
in the cosmos from the time of creation, especially since the Fall of
the angels which was succeeded by the Fall of man in the mythological
guise of Adam and Eve. Whatever may be the answer, it feels right to
deal with the devil as a personal entity with whom we can attain a finite
relationship, albeit a destructive one. This way seems better than being
submerged in a vast ocean of darkness, floundering in dire panic. Since
the devil strikes at the very root of the human personality, it seems not
misguided to accept an element of the personal in its constitution. But
more we cannot say. Personal experience often sheds light on dark areas
of existence that far outdistance the dogmas of the rationalist.

A number of questions rise to mind. Ifthere is indeed a vast nexus of cosmic
evil (involving both the astronomical universe and the intermediate psychic
realm), why does it appear to strike people so arbitrarily? The answer
seems to lie in part in variations of individual sensitivity, especially
where there is no protection by prayer in the lives of vulnerable people,
like the man who was assailed by his dead colleague. Other people lay
themselves open through unwise practices such as the use of the ouija
board or their attendance at spiritualistic seances (these should be
reserved for psychical research workers who know what they are doing, and
certainly not be patronized by the general public). Again there are other
people who, like Faust, deliberately give themselves over to the devil,
just as spiritual aspirants dedicate their lives to God. Satanism itself
is an evil cult that has always been part of the depraved mass of society,
but is currently on the increase. Satanists believe that the Creator God has
withdrawn from the world, never intervening anymore in its affairs, and that
the Son of God who has been given control ofthe earth in the Creator’s
absence is Satan, the god of this world (described in 2 Corinthians 4：4
as the god of this passing age). Iesus tried to destroy Satan’s plan
for the world, but it is, according to their belief, Satan that will
attain the final victory. They participate in depraved rites and through
psychic practices open themselves to the influence of satanic powers. The
motives ofits practitioners are mixed. Most are mentally or emotionally
unbalanced, some are frankly evil people, while others get drawn into the
scene as curious bystanders. These may later be the victims of blackmail.

I have no doubt that the practitioners of Satan worship are soon
assaulted by evil forces, an infestation that shows itselfin a progressive
deterioration of the person’s character. Deceitfulness, perverse sexual
behaviour, stealing, and increasing destructiveness are typical features
of this breakdown of the personality. To the rationalist all these changes
can easily be attributed to fear and the general atmosphere of perversion
that lies around zealous practitioners, but in practice there is usually a
more concentrated focus of psychic assault in such cases, in addition to
the psychological confusion that is drawn to the surface by the eruption
offear and hatred. It is certain that mentally balanced people do not
espouse satanism, nor do they get involved in strange cults. It is the
social misfit and emotional cripple who are attracted to bizarre activities
of this kind. They are sad specimens ofdisordered humanity who seek power to
affirm their shaky confidence. What they are really seeking is understanding
and affection, but there are not many agencies who provide these needs,
at least in a form that accepts the person as he is without imposing a
rationalistic or a sectarian religious style of thinking upon him.
