---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 15 - ䷎ - Ch'ien
    Line: 3
    Page: 109-110
By: Moliere
---
I am not, brother, a doctor to be looked up to; nor do I possess all the
world’s wisdom. But, in one word, I know enough to distinguish truth
from falsehood. And as I know no character more worthy of esteem than the
truly devout, nor anything in the world more noble or beautiful than the
holy fervor of a sincere piety, so I know nothing more odious than the
whited sepulcher of a pretended zealot, than those downright imposters,
those devotees, for public show, whose sacrilegious and deceitful grimaces
abuse with impunity, and make a jest, according to their fancy, of what men
hold most holy and sacred; those men who, from motives of self-interest,
make a trade of piety, and would purchase honor and reputation at the cost
of a hypocritical turning up of the eyes and pretended raptures; those men,
I say, whom we see possessed with such an uncommon ardor for the next world,
in order to make their fortunes in this; who, with great unction and many
prayers, daily recommend and preach solitude in the midst of the court;
who know how to reconcile their zeal with their Vices; who are passionate,
vindictive, without belief, full of artifice, and would, in order to destroy
a man, insolently cover their fierce resentment under the cloak of Heaven’s
interests. They are the more dangerous in their bitter wrath because they
use against us weapons which men reverence and because their passion, for
which they are commended, prompts them to assassinate us with a consecrated
blade. One sees too many of those vile characters, but the really devout
at heart are easily recognized. Our age has shown us some, brother, who may
serve us as glorious examples. Look at Ariston, look at Périandre, Oronte,
Alcidamas, Polydore, Clitandre -- no one disputes their title. But they do
not boast of their virtue. One does not see this unbearable ostentation
in them; and their piety is human, is tractable; they do not censure all
our doings, they think that these corrections would show too much pride on
their part; and, leaving big words to others, they reprove our actions by
their own. They do not think anything evil, because it seems so, and their
mind is inclined to judge well of others. They have no cabals, no intrigues;
all their anxiety is to live well themselves. They never persecute a sinner;
they hate sin only, and do not vindicate the interest of Heaven with greater
zeal than Heaven itself. These are my people, that is the true way to act;
that is, in short, an example to be followed. Your man, to speak plainly,
is not of that stamp; you vaunt his zeal with the utmost good faith;
but I believe that you are dazzled by a false glare.
