---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 73-74
By: Hermes
Tags:
  - Sacrifice-Death=Separation-Sin=Anatomy of the Fallen State
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Eye of the Heart
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=Crossing the Flood
  - Combat-Action=Orthodoxy-Ritual-Method=The Spiritual Master
  - Discernment-Truth=Knowledge=The Excellence of Wisdom
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Supernal Sun
  - Union-Identity=Mysterium Magnum=Silence
---
O men. whither are you being swept away? You are drunken; you have drunk up the
strong drink of ignorance; it has overpowered you, and now you are even vomiting
it forth. Stand firm; turn sober： look upward with the eyes of the heart, --
if you cannot all, yet those at least who can.

This evil of ignorance floods all the land; its current sweeps along the soul
which is penned up in the body, and prevents it from coming to anchor in the
havens of salvation. Suffer not yourselves then to be borne along down stream
by the strong current, but avail yourselves of a backflow, those of you who
are able to reach the haven, and cast anchor there, and seek a guide to lead
you to the door of the House of Knowledge. There you will find the bright
light which is pure from darkness; there none is drunken, but all are sober,
and they look up and see with the heart Him whose will it is that with the
heart alone He should be seen. For He cannot be known by hearing, nor made
known by speech; nor can He be seen with bodily eyes, but with mind and heart
alone.

But first you must tear off this garment which you wear, -- this cloak of
darkness, this web of ignorance, this prop of evil, this bond of corruption,
-- this living death, this conscious corpse, this tomb you carry about with
you, -- this robber in the house, this enemy who hates the things you seek
after, and grudges you the things which you desire. Such is the garment in
which you have clothed yourself; and it grips you to itself and holds you
down, that you may not look upward and behold the beauty of the Truth, and
the Good that abides above, and hate the evil of this thing, discovering its
ill designs against you. For it makes senseless what men deem to be their
organs of sense, stuffing them up with the gross mass of matter, and cramming
them with loathly pleasures, so that you may neither hear of the things you
ought to hear of, nor see the things you ought to see.
