---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Divine Mothers
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 258-262
  Source:
    Title: Autobiography of a Yogi
By: Paramahansa Yogananda
Contributor: Ananda Moyi Ma
Title: The Bengali "Joy-Permeated Mother"
Commentary: |
  Ananda Moyi Ma does not refer to herself as “I"; she uses humble
  circumlocutions like “this body" or “this little girl" or “your
  daughter.” Nor does she refer to anyone as her “disciple.” With
  impersonal wisdom she bestows equally on all human beings the divine love
  of the Universal Mother.
References:
  - Title: Mark
    Locus: 12:30
---
“Sir, please do not leave India without a glimpse ofNirmala Devi. Her
sanctity is intense; she is known far and wide as Ananda Moyi Ma
(Joy Permeated Mother).” My niece, Amiyo Bose, gazed at me earnestly.

“Of course'. I want very much to see the woman saint.” I added, “I
have read of her advanced state of God-realization. A little article
about her appeared years ago in East-West.”

“I have met her,” Amiyo went on. “She recently visited my own small
town of Iamshedpur. At the entreaty of a disciple, Ananda Moyi Ma went to
the home of a dying man. She stood by his bedside; as her hand touched
his forehead, his death-rattle ceased. The disease vanished at once;
to the man’s glad astonishment, he was well.”

A few days later I heard that the Blissful Mother was staying at the home
of a disciple in the Bhowanipur section of Calcutta. Mr. Wright and I set
out immediately from my father’s Calcutta home. As the Ford neared the
Bhowanipur house, my companion and I observed an unusual street scene.

Ananda Moyi Ma was standing in an open-topped automobile, blessing a
throng of about one hundred disciples. She was evidently on the point of
departure. Mr. Wright parked the Ford some distance away, and accompanied
me on foot toward the quiet assemblage. The woman saint glanced in out
direction; she alit from her car and walked toward us.

“Father, you have come!" With these fervent words (in Bengali) she put
her arm around my neck and her head on my shoulder. Mr. Wright, to whom
I had just remarked that I did not know the saint, was hugely enjoying
this extraordinary demonstration of welcome. The eyes of the hundred
chelas were also fixed with some surprise on the affectionate tableau.

I had instantly seen that the saint was in a high state of
ramad/zz’. Oblivious to her outward garb as a woman, she knew herself
as the changeless soul; from that plane she was joyously greeting another
devotee of God. She led me by the hand into her automobile.

“Ananda Moyi Ma, I am delaying your journey!" I protested.

“Father, I am meeting you for the first time in this life,* after
ages!" she said. “Please do not leave yet.”

We sat together in the rear seats of the car. The Blissful Mother
soon entered the immobile ecstatic state. Her beautiful eyes glanced
heavenward and, half-opened, became stilled, gazing into the near-far inner
Elysium. The disciples chanted gently： “Victory to Mother Divine!”

I had found many men of God-realization in India, but never before had I
met such an exalted woman saint. Her gentle face was burnished with the
ineffable joy that had given her the name of Blissful Mother. Long black
tresses lay loosely behind her veiled head. A red dot of sandalwood paste
on her forehead symbolized the spiritual eye, ever open within her. Tiny
face, tiny hands, tiny feet -- a contrast to her spiritual magnitude!

I put some questions to a nearby woman chela while Ananda Moyi Ma remained
entranced.

“The Blissful Mother travels widely in India; in many parts she has
hundreds of disciples,” the (Add told me. “Her courageous efforts
have brought about many desirable social reforms. Although a Bra/1min,
the saint recognizes no caste distinctions. A group of us always travels
with her, looking after her comforts. We have to mother her; she takes
no notice of her body. Ifno one gave her food, she would not eat or make
any inquiries. Even when meals are placed before her, she does not touch
them. To prevent her disappearance from this world, we disciples feed
her with our own hands. For days together she often stays in the divine
trance, scarcely breathing, her eyes unwinking. One of her chief disciples
is her husband, Bholanath. Many years ago, soon after their marriage,
he took the vow of silence.”

The chela pointed to a broad-shouldered, fine-featured man with long hair
and hoary beard. He was standing quietly in the midst ofthe gathering,
his hands folded in a disciple’s reverential attitude.

Refreshed by her dip in the Infinite, Ananda Moyi Ma was now focusing
her consciousness on the material world.

“Father, please tell me where you stay.” Her voice was clear and
melodious.

“At present, in Calcutta or Ranchi; but soon I shall be returning
to America.”

“America?”

“Yes. An Indian woman saint would be sincerely appreciated there by
spiritual seekers. Would you like to go?”

“If Father can take me, I will go.”

This reply caused her nearby disciples to start in alarm.

“Twenty or more of us always travel with the Blissful Mother,” one of
them told me firmly. “We could not live without her. Wherever she goes,
we must go."

Reluctantly I abandoned the plan, as possessing an impractical feature
of spontaneous enlargement!

“Please come at least to Ranchi, with your devotees," I said on taking
leave of the saint. “As a divine child yourself, you will enjoy the
little ones in my school.”

“Whenever Father takes me, I will gladly go.”

A short time later the Ranchi Vidyalaya was in gala array for the saints
promised visit. The youngsters looked forward to any day of festivity --
no lessons, hours of music, and a feast for the climax!

“Victory! Ananda Moyi Ma, kz'jaz'l” This reiterated chant from scores
of enthusiastic little throats greeted the saint’s party as it entered
the school gates. Showers of marigolds, tinkle of cymbals, lusty blowing
of conch shells and beat of the mrz'a'anga drum! The Blissful Mother
wandered smilingly over the sunny Vidyalaya grounds, ever carrying within
her heart the portable paradise.

“It is beautiful here,” Ananda Moyi Ma said graciously as I led
her into the main building. She seated herself with a childlike smile
by my side. The closest of dear friends, she made one feel, yet an
aura of remoteness was ever around her -- the paradoxical isolation of
Omnipresence. “Please tell me something of your life.”

"Father knows all about it; why repeat it?” She evidently felt that
the factual history of one short incarnation was beneath notice.

I laughed, gently repeating my request.

“Father, there is little to tell." She spread her graceful hands in a
deprecatory gesture. “My consciousness has never associated itselfwith
this temporary body. Before 1* came on this earth, Father, ‘I was the
same.‘ As a little girl, ‘I was the same.‘ I grew into womanhood;
still ‘I was the same.’ When the family into which I had been born
made arrangements to have this body married, ‘I was the same.‘
And, Father, in front of you now, ‘I am the same.’ Ever afterward,
though the dance of creation change around me in the hall of eternity,
‘I shall be the same.”

Ananda Moyi Ma sank into a deep meditative state. Her form was statue-still;
she had fled to her ever calling kingdom. The dark pools of her eyes
appeared lifeless and glassy. This expression is often present when
saints remove their consciousness from the physical body, which is then
hardly more than a piece of soulless day We sat together for an hour in
the ecstatic trance. She returned to this world with a gay little laugh.

“Please, Ananda Moyi Ma,” 1 said, “come with me to the
garden. Mr. Wright will take some pictures.”

“Ofcourse, Father. Your will is my will." Her glorious eyes retained
an unchanging divine luster as she posed for many photographs.

Time for the feast! Ananda Moyi Ma squatted on her blanket-seat, a disciple
at her elbow to feed her. Like an infant, the saint obediently swallowed
the food after the (held had brought it to her lips. It was plain that
the Blissful Mother did not recognize any difference between curries
and sweetmeats!

As dusk approached, the saint left with her party amidst a shower of
rose petals, her hands raised in blessing on the little lads. Their faces
shone with the affection she had effortlessly awakened.

“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength,” Christ has
proclaimed; “this is the first commandment."

Casting aside every inferior attachment, Ananda Moyi Ma offers her sole
allegiance to the Lord. Not by the hair-splitting distinctions of scholars
but by the sure logic of faith, the childlike saint has solved the only
problem in human life -- establishment of unity with God.

Man has forgotten this stark simplicity, now befogged by a million
issues. Refusing a monotheistic love to the Creator, nations try to disguise
their infidelity by punctilious respect before the outward shrines of
charity. These humanitarian gestures are virtuous, because for a moment
they divert man‘s attention from himself; but they do not free him from
his prime responsibility in life, referred to by Jesus as the “first
commandment.“ The uplifting obligation to love God is assumed with
man‘s earliest breath of an air freely bestowed by his only Benefactorrt

On one other occasion after her visit to the Ranchi school I had opportunity
to see Ananda Moyi Ma. She stood with a group some months later on the
Serampore station platform, waiting for the train.

“Father, I am going to the Himalayas,” she told me. “Some kind
persons have built for us a hermitage in Dehra Dun."

As she boarded the train, I marveled to see that whether amidst a crowd,
on a train, feasting, or sitting in silence, her eyes never looked away from
God. Within me I still hear her voice, an echo of measureless sweetness：

“Behold, now and always one with the Eternal, ‘I am ever the same.'"
