---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXV
    Page: 57
Title: That in the time of this work a perfect soul hath no special beholding
  to any one man in this life
---
I say not that in this work he shall have a special beholding to any man
in this life, whether that he be friend or foe, kin or stranger; for that
may not be if this work shall perfectly be done, as it is when all things
under God be fully forgotten, as falleth for this work. But I say that he
shall be made so virtuous and so charitable by the virtue of this work,
that his will shall be afterwards, when he condescendeth to commune or to
pray for his even-christian -- not from all this work, for that may not be
without great sin, but from the height of this work, the which is speedful
and needful to do some time as charity asketh -- as specially then directed
to his foe as to his friend, his stranger as his kin. Yea, and some time
more to his foe than to his friend.

Nevertheless, in this work he hath no leisure to look after who is his friend
or his foe, his kin or his stranger. I say not but he shall feel some time --
yea, full oft -- his affection more homely to one, two, or three, than to all
these other： for that is lawful to be, for many causes as charity asketh. For
such an homely affection felt Christ to John and unto Mary, and unto Peter
before many others. But I say, that in the time of this work shall all be
equally homely unto him; for he shall feel then no cause, but only God. So
that all shall be loved plainly and nakedly for God, and as well as himself.

For as all men were lost in Adam and all men that with work will witness
their will of salvation are saved or shall be by virtue of the Passion of
only Christ： not in the same manner, but as it were in the same manner,
a soul that is perfectly disposed to this work, and oned thus to God in
spirit as the proof of this work witnesseth, doth that in it is to make
all men as perfect in this work as itself is. For right as if a limb of our
body feeleth sore, all the tother limbs be pained and diseased therefore,
or if a limb fare well, all the remnant be gladded therewith -- right so is
it ghostly of all the limbs of Holy Church. For Christ is our head, and we
be the limbs if we be in charity： and whoso will be a perfect disciple
of our Lord’s, him behoveth strain up his spirit in this work ghostly,
for the salvation of all his brethren and sisters in nature, as our Lord
did His body on the Cross. And how? Not only for His friends and His kin
and His homely lovers, but generally for all mankind, without any special
beholding more to one than to another. For all that will leave sin and ask
mercy shall be saved through the virtue of His Passion. And as it is said
of meekness and charity, so it is to be understood of all other virtues. For
all they be truly comprehended in this little pressing of love, touched before.
