---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 21 - ䷔ - Shih Ho
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 145- 147
By: Henry Charles Lea
---
Nothing was spared to enhance the effect of the autode-fe’ of Trinity
Sunday, May 21, 1559, in which the first portion of the Valladolid prisoners
were to suffer. It was solemnly proclaimed fifteen days in advance,
during which the buildings of the Inquisition were incessantly patrolled,
day and night, by a hundred armed men, and guards were stationed at the
stagings in the Plaza Mayor, for there were rumors that the prison was
to be blown up and that the stagings were to be fired. Along the line of
the procession palings were set in the middle of the street, forming an
unobstructed path for three to march abreast. ... Every house-front along
the line and around the plaza had its stagings; people flocked in from
thirty and forty leagues around and encamped in the fields. ...

The procession was headed by the effigy of Leonor de Vivero, who had died
during trial, clad in widow’s weeds and bearing a mitre with flames and
appropriate inscriptions, and followed by a coffin containing her remains
to be duly burnt. Those who were to be relaxed in person numbered fourteen,
of whom one, Gonzalo Baez, was a Portuguese convicted of Judaism. Those
admitted to reconciliation, with penance more or less severe, were sixteen
in number, including an Englishman variously styled Anthony Graso or
Bagor - probably Baker - punished for Protestantism, like all the rest,
excepting Baez. When the procession reached the plaza, Augustin Cazalla
was placed in the highest seat, as the conspicuous chief of the heresy,
and next to him his brother, Francisco de Vivero. Melchor Cano at once
commenced the sermon, which occupied an hour, and then Valdés and the
Bishops approached the Princess Juana and Prince Carlos, who were present,
and administered to them the oath to protect and aid the Inquisition,
to which the multitude responded in a mighty roar, “To the death!”
Cazalla, his brother and Alonzo Pe’rez, who were in orders, were duly
degraded from the priesthood, the sentences were read, those admitted
to reconciliation made the necessary adjurations and those condemned to
relaxation were handed over to the secular arm. Mounted on asses, they
were carried to the Plaza de la Puerta de Campo, where the requisite
stakes had been erected, and there they met their end. ...

Of these there were only two or three who merit special
consideration. Cazalla, on his trial, had at first equivocated and
denied that he had dogmatized, asserting that he had only spoken of these
matters to those already converted. As a rule, all the prisoners eagerly
denounced their associates; he may have been more reticent at first,
for he was sentenced to torture in caput alienum, but when stripped he
promised to inform against them fully, which he did, including Carranza
among those who had misled him as to purgatory. He recanted, professed
conversion and eagerly sought reconciliation . ... He declared that, when
opportunity offered in the auto, he would curse and detest Lutheranism
and persuade everyone to do the same, with which purpose he took his
place in the procession.

So great was his emotional exaltation that he fulfilled this promise with
such exuberance during the auto that he had to be checked . ... On the
way to the brasero he continued to exhort the people and directed his
efforts especially to the heroic Herrezuelo, who had steadfastly refused
to abandon his faith and was to be burnt alive . ...

It was otherwise with Herrezuelo, the only martyr in the group. He avowed
his faith and resolutely adhered to it, in spite of all effort to convert
him and of the dreadful fate in store for him. On the way to the brasero,
Cazalla wasted on him all his eloquence. He was gagged and could not
reply, but his stoical endurance showed his unyielding pertinacity. When
chained to the stake, a stone thrown at him struck him in the forehead,
covering his face with blood but, as we are told, it did him no good. Then
he was thrust through the belly by a pious halberdier, but this moved him
not and, when the fire was set, he bore his agony without flinching and,
to the general surprise, he thus ended diabolically, lllescas, who stood
so near that he could watch every expression, reports that he seemed as
impassive as flint but, though he uttered no complaint and manifested no
regret, yet he died with the strangest sadness in his face, so that it
was dreadful to look upon him as on one who in a brief moment would be
in hell with his comrade and master, Luther. ...

The remainder of the Valladolid reformers were reserved for another
celebration, October 8th, honored with the presence of Philip II, who
obediently took the customary oath, with bared head and ungloved hand. It
was, if possible, an occasion of greater solemnity than the previous one. A
Flemish official, who was present, estimates the number of spectators
at two hundred thousand and, though he must have been hardened to such
scenes at home, he cannot repress an expressr'on of sympathy with the
sufferers. Besides a Morisco who was relaxed, a Judaizer reconciled and
two penitents for other offences, there were twenty-six Protestants. The
lesson was the same as in the previous auto, that few had the ardor of
martyrdom. Thirteen had made their peace in time to secure reconciliation
or penance. Even Juana Sa’nchez, who had managed to bring with her
a pair of scissors and had cut her throat, recanted before death, but
her confession was considered imperfect and she was burnt in effigy
. ... only in two cases did this withstand the test of fire. Carlos
de Seso was unyielding to the end and, when we are told that he had to
be supported by two familiars to enable him to stand when hearing his
sentence, we can guess the severity of the torture endured by him. Juan
Sa’nchez was likewise pertinacious; when the fire was set it burnt the
cord fastening him to the stake; he leaped down and ran in flames; it
was thought that he wanted to confess but, when a confessor was brought,
he refused to listen to him; one account says that the guards thrust him
back into the flames, another, that he looked up and saw Carlos de Seso
calmly burning and himself leaped back into the blazing pile . ... Thus
was exterminated the nascent Protestantism of Valladolid.
