---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 281-282
  Source:
    Title: The Coming of Lilith
    Source:
      Title: Womanguides
By: Judith Plaskow
Title: A Jewish Feminist Midrash on Lilith and Eve
---
In the beginning the Lord God formed Adam and Lilith from the dust ofthe
ground and breathed into their nostrils the breath of life. Created from
the same source, both having been formed from the ground, they were equal
in all ways. Adam, man that he was, didn’t like this situation, and
he looked for ways to change it. He said, “I’ll have my figs now,
Lilith,” ordering her to wait on him, and he tried to leave to her
the daily tasks oflife in the garden. But Lilith wasn’t one to take
any nonsense; she picked herself up, uttered God’s holy name, and flew
away. “Well, now, Lord,” complained Adam, “that uppity woman you
sent me has gone and deserted me.” The Lord, inclined to be sympathetic,
sent his messengers after Lilith, telling her to shape up and return to
Adam or face dire punishment. She, however, preferring anything to living
with Adam, decided to stay right where she was. And so God, after more
careful consideration this time, caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam,
and out of one of his ribs created for him a second companion, Eve.

For a time Eve and Adam had quite a good thing going. Adam was happy now,
and Eve, though she occasionally sensed capacities within herself that
remained undeveloped, was basically satisfied with the role of Adam’s
wife and helper. The only thing that really disturbed her was the excluding
closeness of the relationship between Adam and God. Adam and God just
seemed to have more in common, being both men, and Adam came to identify
with God more and more. After a while that made God a bit uncomfortable
too, and he started going over in his mind whether he might not have made
a mistake in letting Adam talk him into banishing Lilith and creating Eve,
in light of the power that had given Adam.

Meanwhile Lilith, all alone, attempted from time to time to rejoin the human
community in the garden. After her first fruitless attempt to breach its
walls, Adam worked hard to build them stronger, even getting Eve to help
him. He told her fearsome stories of the demon Lilith who threatens women
in childbirth and steals children from their cradles in the middle of the
night. The second time Lilith came she stormed the garden’s main gate,
and a great battle between her and Adam ensued, in which she was finally
defeated. This time, however, before Lilith got away, Eve got a glimpse
of her and saw she was a woman like herself.

After this encounter, seeds of curiosity and doubt began to grow in
Eve’s mind. Was Lilith indeed just another woman? Adam had said she
was a demon. Another woman! The very idea attracted Eve. She had never
seen another creature like herself before. And how beautiful and strong
Lilith had looked! How bravely she had fought! Slowly, slowly, Eve began
to think about the limits of her own life within the garden.

One day, after many months of strange and disturbing thoughts, Eve,
wandering around the edge of the garden, noticed a young apple tree she
and Adam had planted, and saw that one of its branches stretched over
the garden wall. Spontaneously she tried to climb it, and struggling to
the top, swung herself over the wall.

She had not wandered long on the other side before she met the one she had
come to find, for Lilith was waiting. At first sight of her, Eve remembered
the tales of Adam and was frightened, but Lilith understood and greeted her
kindly. “Who are you?” they asked each other, “What is your story?”
And they sat and spoke together, of the past and then of the future. They
talked not once, but many times, and for many hours. They taught each
other many things, and told each other stories, and laughed together,
and cried, over and over, till the bond of sisterhood grew between them.

Meanwhile, back in the garden, Adam was puzzled by Eve’s comings and
goings, and disturbed by what he sensed to be her new attitude toward
him. He talked to God about it, and God, having his own problems with Adam
and a somewhat broader perspective, was able to help him out a little --
but he, too, was confused. Something had failed to go according to plan. As
in the days of Abraham, he needed counsel from his children. “I am who
I am,” thought God, “but I must become who I will become.”

And God and Adam were expectant and afraid the day Eve and Lilith returned
to the garden, bursting with possibilities, ready to rebuild it together.
