---
Source:
  By: Xuedou Zhongxian
  ID: 5a0c4642-20c8-46c0-8073-7434833fa6b4
  Locus:
    Case: 89
  Title: Odes to a Classic Hundred Standards
  Translator: Gregory Wonderwheel
Title: Yunyan's Great Compassion
---
\[Yuanwu's] Appended pointer says：

Flowing throughout the body are eyes, yet seeing does
not arrive at it. Flowing throughout the body are ears, yet hearing
does not attain it. Flowing throughout the body are mouths yet
speaking does not manifest it. Flowing throughout the body is the
heart-mind, yet reflecting does not produce it.

Were "flowing throughout the body" to immediately just
stop, and suddenly, if you are without eyes, how do you make seeing
alive; without ears, how do you make hearing alive; without a mouth,
how do you make speaking alive; without the heart-mind, how do you make
reflecting alive?

If you face toward the particular inner side and are
able to unfold a single thread of the Way, then you are together with
the ancient Buddhas sharing the meeting. Were meeting the standards
(i.e., the koans) to just stop, just say, particularly what person
would you meet?

Raised：

Yunyan asked Daowu, "How does the Bodhisattva of Great
Compassion expect to make use of the many hands and eyes?

Wu said, "It is like a person in the middle of the night
whose hands feel back for the pillow."

Yan said, "I understand."

Wu said, "How do you make your understanding alive?"

Yan said, "All over the body are hands and eyes."

Wu said, "You said the greatest part of it, but are only able
to say eight-tenths."

Yan said, "Senior Teacher, how do you make it alive?"

Wu said, "Flowing throughout the body are hands and
eyes."

[Xuedou's] ode says：

All over the body, yes.

Flowing throughout the body, yes.

Picking it up, though, is still one hundred thousand li [away].

Spreading out and extending [it's wings], the roc mounts the clouds of
the six unions

To strike the wind drum and clarify the waters of the four oceans.

Indeed, oh, what fine dust suddenly comes into being?

Oh, what piece of thin hair has not yet stopped?

You don't see,

The pearls in the net hang down in patterns, the reflections repeating
and repeating,

The hands and eyes in the head of the stick accord with what rises up.

Bah!
