---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: L
    Page: 87
Title: Which is chaste love; and how in some creatures such sensible
  comforts be but seldom, and in some right oft
---
And hereby mayest thou see that we should direct all our beholding unto this
meek stirring of love in our will. And in all other sweetness and comforts,
bodily or ghostly, be they never so liking nor so holy, if it be courteous
and seemly to say, we should have a manner of recklessness. If they come,
welcome them： but lean not too much on them for fear of feebleness, for it
will take full much of thy powers to bide any long time in such sweet feelings
and weepings. And peradventure thou mayest be stirred for to love God for them,
and that shalt thou feel by this： if thou grumble overmuch when they be
away. And if it be thus, thy love is not yet neither chaste nor perfect. For
a love that is chaste and perfect, though it suffer that the body be fed and
comforted in the presence of such sweet feelings and weepings, nevertheless
yet it is not grumbling, but full well pleased for to lack them at God’s
will. And yet it is not commonly without such comforts in some creatures,
and in some other creatures such sweetness and comforts be but seldom.

And all this is after the disposition and the ordinance of God, all after
the profit and the needfulness of diverse creatures. For some creatures be
so weak and so tender in spirit, that unless they were somewhat comforted by
feeling of such sweetness, they might on nowise abide nor bear the diversity
of temptations and tribulations that they suffer and be travailed with in
this life of their bodily and ghostly enemies. And some there be that they be
so weak in body that they may do no great penance to cleanse them with. And
these creatures will our Lord cleanse full graciously in spirit by such sweet
feelings and weepings. And also on the tother part there be some creatures
so strong in spirit, that they can pick them comfort enough within in their
souls, in offering up of this reverent and this meek stirring of love and
accordance of will, that them needeth not much to be fed with such sweet
comforts in bodily feelings. Which of these be holier or more dear with God,
one than another, God wots and I not.
