---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 271-273
  Source:
    Title: The Feminine Face of God
By:
  - Sherry Ruth Anderson
  - Patricia Hopkins
Title: The Question That Wouldn't Go Away
---
Shekhinah. Shekhinah. The word simply popped into my mind like an uninvited
guest and wouldn't go away. At times it seemed to disappear, but then it
would come again, quietly, this strange word--,Shekhinah. It seemed to be
waiting patiently for me to pay attention to it. After hearing it in my mind
for three days I tried saying it out loud. "Shekhinah." It had an interesting
sound. And when I said it, I felt a soft tug somewhere deep inside.

I began to ask my friends if they knew what it meant. It sounded as if it
could be Hebrew, but although I knew some Hebrew, it was not familiar to
me. When my husband and friends were unable to help, 1 tried the library in
our small town but found no answer there either. Shekhinah. Shekhinah. It
was becoming more insistent now, demanding my attention.

Still puzzling over what it could mean, I was sitting in my bedroom one
morning when my friend Joan hurried through the door. She strode across
the room and thrust a book into my hands. "Let's try this," she said. I
glanced down at the blue cover on which the word Kabbalah was written,
and turned to the index. Running my finger quickly down the S column,
I read, "Shekhinah： the feminine face of God."

The words sent shock waves rippling down my spine and goose flesh bristling
on my bare arms because I realized at once that the Shekhinah was not an
uninvited guest at all. She had been announced to me with great ceremony
in a powerful dream a full month earlier.

In the dream, I happily soar high above the clouds on a great golden dragon
until I wonder, "Is this all there is?" The dragon immediately descends
to earth, alighting at the side of a jewelike temple on a large body of
water. I want to enter the temple, but I'm afraid to go in alone. I turn
hack to the dragon, hoping it will come and protect me. But this temple
is human-sized and the dragon will not fit through the door.

I begin to climb the stairs to the entrance anyway, and now I see a
ferocious temple guardian with bulging eyes looming menacingly in the
doorway. Black dogs snarl on either side of him. With uncharacteristic
bravery I continue walking, and as I stride through the door the guardian
and his dogs evaporate as if made of fog.

Once I'm inside the doorway, an old man with long robes and a white beard
emerges from an inner hallway to greet me. Without actually speaking,
he lets me know that his name is Melchizedek. He is wearing a handsome
dagger with a handle of turquoise and jade, and as soon as ! notice this
he presents me with a matching dagger, indicating that I am to wear it
on my right side. Then he motions me ahead of him. It is clear that he
expects me to lead the way.

I step into a long hallway with a high ceiling and red tiles on the
floor. Walking slowly, we eventually come to a pair of polished wooden
doors at the end of the corridor. I open them silently and lead the
way into a large, empty room. A plain wooden stage is set against the
far wall. At the hack d the stage is a built-in cab/net, i approach the
cabinet and pull open the doors.

I am dumbfounded by what I see. Rolled onto finely carved wooden poles is
the most sacred object in Judaism, the Torah. I learned at a child that
the Torah contains the five books of Moses written on parchment by an
Orthodox scribe, and that if even one letter has been written incorrectly,
the Torah cannot be used. 1 have never actually seen a Torah close up or
held one, since these privileges were permitted only to men when ! was
growing up. But now I lift this Torah carefully out of its cabinet and
cradle it to m¢ tenderly as if it were a baby.

Then I notice something unusual. Instead of a mantle of velvet coveting
the scrolls, or a simple ribbon holding them closed, the Torah has bern
sealed shut by a dark round blot of red wax. I look at Melchizedek. "This
is a very special Torah," he says. Pulling out his dagger, he breaks the
seal and rolls open the scrolls. They are absolutely blank. "The Torah
is empty," h¢ says, "because what you need m know now is not written in
any book. You already contain that knowledge. It is to be unfolded from
within you."

"What is this Torah for?" I ask.

My question seems to set in motion the next sequence of events. Without
speaking Mekhizedek lifts the Torah and lightly places it inside my body,
from my shoulders to my knees. I accept this gratefully, feeling my body
as a sacred vessel.

At once, a great commotion breaks out behind us. Spinning around, I that
the room is now filled with long-bearded patriarchs wearing black coats
and trousers. They're holding hands, laughing, tinging, and dancing
jubilantly around the room. They pull me into their celebration. As I
dance I seem to see Moses, King David, and King Solomon, and Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. They, too, are dressed in black coats and trousers,
dancing w/Ih such heartfelt abandonment that i catch their joy and am
filled with it. Ecstatically we whirl round and round the room, laughing.

Finally the dancing stops and I ask, "What is this all about?" Melchizedek
answers, "We are celebrating because you, a woman, have conseated to accept
full spiritual responsibility in your life. This is your initiation as
one who will serve the planet."

As I wonder what this means, he continues, "And you are not the only
one. Many, many women are coming forward now to lead the way." "But who
will be our teachers?" I protest.

"You will be teachers for each other. You will come together in circles
and speak your truth to each other. The time has come for women to accept
their spiritual responsibility for our planet."

"Will you help us?" I ask the assembled patriarchs.

"We are your brothers," they answer, and with that the entire room
is flooded with an energy of indescribable kindness. I am absolutely
confident in this moment that they are our brothers. I feel their love
without any question. They say then, "We have initiated you and we give
you our wholehearted blessings. But we no longer know the way. Our ways
do not work anymore. You women must find a new way."
