---
Tags:
  - The Quest=The Fire Beyond the Tomb - Contemplating God, Faith, and Truth
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 17-19
  Source:
    Title: Living in Truth
By: Vaclav Havel
---
Individuals can be alienated from themselves only because there is something in
them to alienate. The terrain of this violation is their authentic existence.
Living the truth is thus woven directly into the texture of living a lie. It
is the repressed alternative, the authentic aim to which living a lie is
an inauthentic response. Only against this background does living a lie
make any sense： it exists because of that background. In its excusatory,
chimerical rootedness in the human order, it is a response to nothing other
than the human predisposition to truth. Under the orderly surface of the life
oflies, therefore, there slumbers the hidden sphere of life in its real aims,
of its hidden openness to truth.

The singular, explosive, incalculable political power of living within the
truth resides in the fact that living openly within the truth has an ally,
invisible to be sure, but omnipresent： this hidden sphere. It is from this
sphere that life lived openly in the truth grows; it is to this sphere that
it speaks, and in it that it finds understanding. This is where the potential
for communication exists. But this place is hidden and therefore, from the
perspective of power, very dangerous. The complex ferment that takes place
within it goes on in semi-darkness, and by the time it finally surfaces into
the light of day as an assortment of shocking surprises to the system, it
is usually too late to cover them up in the usual fashion. Thus they create
a situation in which the regime is confounded, invariably causing panic and
driving it to react in inappropriate ways.

It seems that the primary breeding ground for what might, in the widest
possible sense of the word, be understood as an opposition in the
post-totalitarian system is living within the truth. The confrontation
between these opposition forces and the powers that be, of course, will
obviously take a form essentially different from that typical of an open
society or a classical dictatorship. Initially, this confrontation does
not take place on the level of real, institutionalized, quantifiable power
which relies on the various instruments of power, but on a different level
altogether： the level of human consciousness and conscience, the existential
level. The effective range of this special power cannot be measured in terms
of disciples, voters, or soldiers, because it lies spread out in the fifth
column of social consciousness, in the hidden aims oflife, in human beings'
repressed longing for dignity and fundamental rights, for the realization
of their real social and political interests. Its power, therefore, does not
reside in the strength of definable political or social groups, but chiefly
in the strength of a potential, which is hidden throughout the whole of
society, including the official power structures of that society. Therefore
this power does not rely on soldiers of its own, but on the soldiers of the
enemy as it were-that is to say, on everyone who is living within the lie
and who may be struck at any moment (in theory, at least) by the force of
truth (or who, out of an instinctive desire to protect their position, may
at last adapt to that force). It is a bacteriological weapon, so to speak,
utilized when conditions are ripe by a single civilian to disarm an entire
division. This power does not participate in any direct struggle for power;
rather it makes its influence felt in the obscure arena of being itself.
The hidden movements it gives rise to there, however, can issue forth (when,
where, under what circumstances, and to what extent are difficult to predict)
in something visible： a real political act or event, a social movement,
a sudden explosion of civil unrest, a sharp conflict inside an apparently
monolithic power structure, or simply an irrepressible transformation in
the social and intellectual climate. And since all genuine problems and
matters of critical importance are hidden beneath a thick crust of lies, it
is never quite clear when the proverbial last straw will fall, or what that
straw will be. This, too, is why the regime prosecutes, almost as a reflex
action preventively, even the most modest attempts to live within the truth.

Why was Solzhenitsyn driven out of his own country? Certainly not because
he represented a unit of real power, that is, not because any of the
regime’s representatives felt he might unseat them and take their place
in government. Solzhenitsyn’s expulsion was something else： a desperate
attempt to plug up the dreadful wellspring of truth, a truth which might
cause incalculable transformations in social consciousness, which in turn

might one day produce political debacles unpredictable in their conse-
quences. And so the post-totalitarian system behaved in a characteristic way：

it defended the integrity of the world of appearances in order to defend
itself For the crust presented by the life oflies is made of strange
stuff. As long as it seals off hermetically the entire society, it appears
to be made of stone. But the moment someone breaks through in one place,
when one person cries out, “The emperor is naked!" -- when a single person
breaks the rules of the game, thus exposing it as a game -- everything suddenly
appears in another light and the whole crust seems then to be made of a tissue
on the point of tearing and disintegrating uncontrollably.
