---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 308-312
  Source:
    Title: Candles in the Dark
By: Mary Craig
Title: Jerzy Popieluszko
Contributor:
  - Waldemar Chrostowski
  - Lech Walesa
  - Adam Michnik
---
The ten days which followed the news oerrzy Popieluszko’s abduction
were filled with uncertainty and anxious speculation, The churches --
particularly St, Stanislaw Kostka -- were packed night and day, and
throughout Poland Masses were said for his safe return, A banner outside
St, Stanislaw Kostka proclaimed： WHEREVER YOU ARE, JUREK, CHRIST IS WITH
YOU, AND OUR PRAYERS, Many workers wanted to organise strikes or protest
marches, in order to relieve their pent-up emotions Solidarity, however,
urged caution, As tension and fear grew steadily, the bishops appealed
to the authorities to find the missing priest with all possible speed,
Uniformed and plainclothes police scoured the country, using helicopters and
sniffer dogs in the search, General Iaruzelski denounced the kidnapping and
suggested that it was a move on the part ofhard-line Communists (backed by
the Soviet Union) to undermine his authority and portray him as incapable
of keeping order, Solidarity was inclined to think so too.

On 27 October, the day before the usual monthly Mass for Poland was
due to take place, General Kiszczak, the Minister for Internal Affairs,
announced on TV that “sadly” the authors of this “revolting crime"
were three officials from his own Ministry, They had been arrested,
he said, and would suffer severe penalties for their crime, Next day,
80,000 people from all over the country attended the Mass for Poland, for
the first time without Jerzy Popieluszko, The mood was sombre and fearful.

Then, on 30 October, after an announcement that a search was taking place
in the Wloclawek dam, the grisly tragedy moved towards its inevitable
end, At eight o’clock, as the evening Mass was finishing, a priest
brought the news： “Brothers and sisters, today in the waters of the
Wloclawek dam, they found our priest. ... ” A howl of agony arose and
continued for many minutes, growing in intensity as it was reinforced by
the tolling of the bells. “Outside,” wrote a British journalist who
was present, “the people ... were visibly stunned and helpless, They
stood with pale, shut faces, with forgotten, folded hands.” By midnight,
the fence surrounding the church was ablaze with flowers and candles.

Some attempt was made to pressurise Ierzy’s parents into having him
buried in his home village away from the glare of publicity, But his
mother would have none of it. “Years ago,” she said, “I gave my son
to the Church. I am not going to take him back now.” Eventually, it was
agreed that he should be buried in Warsaw and -- after much argument --
in the grounds of his own beloved church of St, Stanislaw Kostka.

On 2 November, the family and friends of the murdered priest went to
the Institute of Forensic Medicine in Bialystok to collect the body,
The full horror ofhis dying was at last apparent, The body was covered
with brownishgrey bruises; the nose and eyes were blackened, the fingers
dark red, the feet grey, It seemed as though much of his hair had been
pulled out and large areas of the skin on his legs had been rubbed away,
Where his tongue had once been there was only a piece of mangled pulp,
The doctor who was pre -sent said that in all his experience he had never
examined a corpse with so much external damage.

Outside the church and in the surrounding streets tens of thousands
awaited the arrival of the body at about six-thirty in the evening,
Waldemar Chrostowski was one of the pallbearers：

" Amid the tolling of the bells and the overwhelming sobbing of thousands
of people, the cofin containing Jerzys' body was lowered to the ground
in front of the church, With the others I took it on my shoulder and
carried it into the church, I wanted to stay with Jerzy as long as I
could, I turned my face towards the cofin, thinking of all that he had
suffered before he died, Thinking too that when his time had come to die,
those he loved were far away; that in those last fateful moments there
was no one to protect him from the hatred of his attackers, Tears poured
down my cheeks -- I kept asking myself the same question over and over --
why had I not stayed with him till the end?"

In that regret he was not alone, Among the many farewell notes pinned to
the perimeter fence was one from Solidarity： “We could not protect the
one we loved best,” it mourned, Another, from a group of non-believers,
promised that they too would be joining in the all-night vigil around
Fr. Ierzy's coffin, And a third simply proclaimed the words by which Ierzy
had lived： FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES AS WE FORGIVE THOSE WHO TRESPASS
AGAINST US and FATHER, FORGIVE THEM, THEY KNOW NOT WHAT THEY DO.

There were steel-workers, medical workers, actors, teachers, filmmakers,
printers, students, writers, priests, nuns and many others who filed
slowly past the coffin to pay their last respects to Poland’s best-loved
son. They stayed in the church until five o’clock next morning when the
church was cleared of its mourners, By seven they had returned, their
numbers swollen now by delegations representing the banned Solidarity
movement from all over Poland.

When the funeral Mass began (celebrated by Cardinal Glemp, six bishops
and six priests on the exterior balcony, and over a thousand other
priests inside and outside the church), a wreath of thorns lay on the
catafalque. Between 500,000 and 550,000 mourners were in attendance,
and their self -discipline was astonishing, In the overpowering silence,
it was as if the whole assembly had been, as one woman put it, “touched
by a visible wave ofgrace."

Anguish broke through afterwards, in the farewell speeches which fol
-lowed the Mass. “Iurek,” cried one ofthe Warsaw steel-men, his voice
hoarse with grief. “lurek, our friend, can you hear the bells tolling
for freedom? Can you hear us praying? Your ark, the good ship Solidarity
of Hearts drifts along carrying more and more of us on board . ... You
have already con -quered Christ. . , and that was the victory you most
longed for.”

When the coffin was sealed, it was carried to the grave outside, The
flowers, wreaths and candles enveloping not only the grave-site but the
church, the forecourt and the squares and streets beyond, bore witness
to the fact that Poland had acquired a new martyr and the pilgrims had
come already to his shrine, That Christmas, the crib at St, Stanislaw
Kostka would be not a manger but a car boot filled with straw on which
lay the mangled body ofa young man, The Poles understand about martyrdom;
it has for so long been part of their living experience.

In the short term, Ierzy’s death heralded a new wave of repression aimed
principally, as the Minister for Religious Affairs said, at “priests
who deliver sermons which violate the laws.” 1985 saw a spate of attacks
against the clergy and Solidarity, There were more “disappearances.”
Stones were thrown at the car of Fr, Kazimierz Iancarz, for example,
as he drove from Gdansk to attend a Mass for Poland in Warsaw, In
April a twenty-nine-year -old priest, Tadeusz Zaleski, was attacked in
his parents’ house, immobilised by a chemical spray and burned on his
hands, face and chest with V-shaped burns, The authorities claimed that
the priest was mentally disturbed and had inflicted the burns on himself,
But two separate commissions of doctors found this proposition unlikely
in the extreme, particularly as they found no evidence of instability in
the young man.

Jerzy Popieluszko’s murderers were put on trial in Torun four months
after his death-an event unique in the annals of Communist Eastern Europe,
in that for the first time the secret police were being forced to account
for their actions, But the event itself was a travesty in which the victim
himself rather than the accused seemed to be on trial, One defendant,
ex-Captain Piotrowski, was allowed to utter an impassioned tirade against
the Church and to blame Father Popieluszko for all the social unrest in
Poland, ExColonel Adam Pietruszka said that Popieluszko was one of a number
of priests in Poland “who wear a cross on their chests and carry hatred
in their hearts.” The State Prosecutor suggested that it was “the
extremism” of Father Popieluszko which had given rise to an unfortunate
matching “extremism” on the part ofhis murderers, Mr, Olszewski, the
Prosecutor representing the Church, was dumbfounded by all this. “This
is supposed to be the trial ofthe murderers of Father Popieluszko,” he
bitterly reminded the court. “I never thought I should have to stand in
court and defend the innocent victim of the crime.” Waldemar Chrostowski,
whose testimony the State Prosecutor had done everything in his power to
discredit, said the trial had been used “to spit upon the Church.”

The trial lasted twelve days, In his summing-up, the Judge said there was
no question of a death penalty since the accused had not acted “from
base motives” but only out of excessive zeal in eliminating an “enemy
of the State.” Nevertheless, he conceded, a crime had been committed and
he sentenced Pietruszka and Piotrowski to twenty-five years’ imprisonment
(with ten years’ loss of civil rights). Pekala was sentenced to fifteen
years, and Chmielewski to fourteen.

To counter the trauma induced by the Torun trial and its own loss of face,
the government unleashed a barrage of propaganda against both Solidarity and
the Church. “We are faced with propaganda terrorism," said the Solidarity
leader, Lech Walesa, in March. “They have practically declared civil
war on us.” Bishops were asked to remove outspoken priests to country
parishes where they could do no harm, Not that bishops themselves were
immune from attack, The new bishop ofGdansk was attacked in front ofhis
own cathedral, He managed to reach his car and the attacker ran straight
into the police station dropping his identification papers as he ran,
Two young girls, witnesses to the incident, picked up the papers and took
them to the clergy-house, As they left, they were detained, charged with
prostitution and locked up, They were released when the policeman’s
identity papers were handed over, but no explanation or apology was
offered for their treatment.

But in spite of the regime doing its worst, an indefinable change had
come over Poland, The fear had gone, and in its place had come a deep
con -tempt, With hindsight it is possible to say that with the death of
Ierzy Popieluszko, the Communists finally lost the battle for Poland-and,
by extension, for the world, The murder dispelled any lingering doubts the
Poles might have had about the possibility of co-existing with the regime,
It was obvious that no accommodation was possible with people who would stop
at nothing -- not even murder-- to stamp out opposition to its policies. As
long as they remained in power, the nation would continue without hope.

A new hymn, popularly attributed to the pen of Fr, Popieluszko, expressed
this combination of anguish and determination, Sung at every Mass, it began
with a lament： “Oh my country, how long you have suffered. How deep are
your wounds to-dayl” But it ended on a note of hope, The white eagle of
Poland, chained now by the foot, would break its chain “when the freedom
bell shall ring.” Meanwhile, “Mary, Queen of Poland, grant us freedom,
peace and loving hearts, that we may always be true to you and to your
Son.” In those trying days, it was a chokingly sad but uplifting experi'
ence to hear them sing these words, In spite of their spiritual fervour,
one had little hope that their Freedom bell would ever ring.

In a farcical show-trial ofSolidarity activists in May 1985 the defendants
were prevented from stating their case, defence lawyers were not allowed to
question police witnesses and all embarrassing questions were disallowed,
On the other hand, free rein was given to prosecuting counsel and police
wit -nesses, It was, said Lech Walesa, “an insult to justice, The law in
Poland has been trodden underfoot and its place taken by brute force.”
Yet the trial was probably Communism’s last gasp. “Whatever sentence
is passed on us," wrote one of the defendants, Adam Michnik, in his diary,
“it will be a sentence on laruzelski and his cohorts rather than on us,
They will incur the 0dium of the world for their lawlessness; whereas they
will have offered us the priceless gift ofdignity, which is inseparable
from faithfulness. ... The functionaries think that by gagging us they
have deprived us of our dignity, But that is the one thing they cannot
do.” Iaruzelski’s totalitarian regime in Poland was, wrote Michnik
in his prison cell, in its death throes, Totally deprived ofpopular sup
-port, it was “Communism with its teeth knocked out.”

Adam Michnik’s insight proved right, Four years later, on 4 June 1989,
the first post-war, non-Communist government came to power without
bloodshed in Poland, It was headed by a Catholic, Tadeusz Mazowiecki,
Not only in Poland, but throughout Eastern Europe, Communism was in
disarray. The Freedom bell was ringing at last.
