---
By: Manhae
Format: verse
Source:
  ID: e13d8994-eff6-4830-981a-b30658d44b81
  Locus:
    Page: 14-15
    Number: 10
Title: Parting
---
People are weak, fragile, deceitful.
In this world, parting from real love is not possible.
What parting is there from my lover, who trades love for death?
Parting tears are false flowers, gil'ded drops of gold.

Where is the parting kiss cut from a knife?
Where is the parting wine brewed from the bloom of life?
Where is the parting ring made from the ruby of blood?
Parting tears are jewels of curses, deceit’s crystals.

Parting in love is the opposite of parting;
so there is a greater love in parting.
If not a direct love, then an implied one.
For I love myself more than my departed lover.
If I loved her more than myself parting would disappear
until moss covers the wheel of time that turns eternity.

No, no. Love is more than “truth”; parting is greater than death.
If death is a drop of cold dew, parting is a deluge of flowers.
If death is a bright star, parting is the glorious sun.
To love someone more than life -- you can’t die because of this love.

Living in fear for the sake of love is a greater sacrifice than death.
Parting is the price of living for love’s sake,
  because you grieve for a lover’s death more than for partm'g itself.
Love isn’t only in the candle’s red flame or the fresh wine,
it's in the formlessness that mirrors each others’ minds
  through the distance.

A lover isn’t forgotten in death, she’s remembered in parting.
A lover isn’t smiled upon in death, she’s cried for in' parting.
The regret of parting isn’t repaid by the comfort of death;
sadness is endured for the lover’s sake.
Love can’t bear dying, and nothing is greater than love that bears parting.

Real love has no place.
It’s not just the embrace of a lover, it’s the love of separation.
Real love has no time.
Parting is in body, but love does not end.

For the love of one’s lover, death offers a knife; parting offers a flower.
Tears of parting are truth, goodness, beauty.
Tears of parting are Buddha, Moses, Jeanne d’Arc.
