---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Kuan Yin
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 246
  Source:
    Title: Reflections on the Art of Living
By: Joseph Campbell
---
I have a wonderful story about Kuan-yin, one of the personifications of
the great Mahayana Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, the embodiment of compassion.

It seems that Kuan-yin realized that in a certain part of China, out in
the rural areas, nobody had cut heard ol enlightenment. They were all
interested in horse racing and all this macho stuff. So she turns herself
into a gloriously beautiful girl, comes into town with fresh fish from
the river to sell, and when her basket is empty, she disappears. Early
the next day, this beautiful fish-selling girl is there again, and then
once again she disappears. This daily pattern continues, and soon all of
the men have become enchanted by her.

One morning, when she appears, about ten or twenty of them surround her
and say, "You have to marry one of us." “Well.” she says, “I cannot
marry twenty men, but tomorrow morning, if one of you can recite by heart
the Sutra of the Compassionate Kuan-yin, I will marry that man.“ The
next morning, a dozen men know the entire sutra by heart, so she says,
“Well, I cannot marry all of you but I will marry the one who can
interpret this sutra to me tomorrow." The next day, there are four men
who can interpret the sutra, so now she says, “I am only one woman,
and I can't marry four men, but if one of you has experienced the meaning
of this sutra three days from now, then I will marry that man."

Three days later, there is but one man waiting for her. Now she says,
“My little house is down by the bend in the river. Come there this
evening, and you will be my husband."

So that eyening, he goes to where the shore bends and comes to a little
house. An old couple is standing outside, and the old man says, “Oh,
we'ye been waiting a long, long time for you. Our daughter is inside.“
But when he goes into the room, it's empty. She isn‘t there. So he looks
out the window and sees footprints, which he follows down to the river,
where he finds a little pair of shoes at the water's edge, but no girl.

Then, as he's standing there, with the reeds blowing and so forth, he
realizes that all the reeds and eyerything else is she. Through her allure
and charm, which is what the female figure represent in these Mahayana
images, he realizes the nirvanic grace of beauty in the universe. Having
understood the sutra, he knew what he was experiencing, and he received
illumination.
