---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "9 - ䷈ - Ch'u"
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 71-72
By: Thomas Henry Huxley
---
\ ... the practice of that which is ethically best -- what we call goodness
or virtue -- involves a course of conduct which, in all respects, is opposed
to that which leads to success in the cosmic struggle for existence. In
place of ruthless self-assertion, it demands self-restraint; in place
of thrusting aside, or treading down, all competitors, it requires that
the individual shall not merely respect, but shall help his fellows;
its influence is directed, not so much to the survival of the fittest,
as to the fitting of as many as possible to survive. It repudiates the
gladiatorial theory of existence. ... Laws and moral precepts are directed
to the end of curbing the cosmic process, and reminding the individual
of his duty to the community, to the protection and influence of which
he owes, if not existence itself, at least the life of something better
than a brutal savage. ... Let us understand, once and for all, that the
ethical progress of society depends, not on imitating the cosmic process,
still less in running away from it, but in combating it. It may seem an
audacious proposal thus to pit the microcosm against the macrocosm and to
set man to subdue nature to his higher ends; but I venture to think that
the great intellectual difference between ancient times and our own day
lies in the solid foundation we have acquired for the hope that such an
enterprise may meet with a certain measure of success.

The history of civilizations details the steps by which men have succeeded
in building up an artificial world within the cosmos. Fragile reed as he
may be, man, as Pascal says, is a thinking reed： there lies within him
a fund of energy, operating intelligently and so far akin to that which
pervades the universe, that it is competent to influence and modify the
cosmic process. In virtue of his intelligence, the dwarf bends the Titan
to his will.
