---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 199-200
  Source:
    Title: Memories, Dreams, Reflections
By: C. G. Jung
---
Science is tacitly convinced that a nonpsychic, transcendental object
exists. But science also knows how difficult it is to grasp the real nature
of the object, especially when the organ of perception fails or is lacking,
and when the appropriate modes of thought do not exist or have still to be
created. In cases where neither our sense organs nor their artificial aids
can attest the presence of a real object, the difficulties mount enormously,
so that one feels tempted to assert that there is simply no real object
present. I have never drawn this overhasty conclusion, for I have never
been inclined to think that our senses were capable of perceiving all
forms of being. I have, therefore, even hazarded the postulate that the
phenomenon of archetypal configurations -- which are psychic events par
excellence -- may be founded upon a psychoid base, that is, upon an only
partially psychic and possibly altogether different form of being. For
lack ofempirical data I have neither knowledge not understanding of such
forms of being, which are commonly called spiritual. From the point of
view of science, it is immaterial what I may believe on that score, and
I must accept my ignorance. But insofar as the archetypes act upon me,
they are real and actual to me, even though I do not know what their
real nature is. This applies, of course, not only to the archetypes
but to the nature of the psyche in general. Whatever it may state about
itself, it will never get beyond itself. All comprehension and all that is
comprehended is in itself psychic, and to that extent we are hopelessly
cooped up in an exclusively psychic world. Nevertheless, we have good
reason to suppose that behind this veil there exists the uncomprehended
absolute object which affects and influences us -- and to suppose it even,
or particularly, in the case of psychic phenomena about which no verifiable
statements can be made. Statements concerning possibility or impossibility
are valid only in specialized fields; outside those fields they are merely
arrogant presumptions.

Prohibited though it may be from an objective point of view to make
statements out of the blue -- that is, without sufficient reason -- there
are nevertheless some statements which apparently have to be made without
objective reasons. The justification here is a psychodynamic one, of the
sort usually termed “subjective” and regarded as a purely personal
matter. But that is to commit the mistake of failing to distinguish
whether the statement really proceeds only from an isolated subject, and is
prompted by exclusively personal motives, or whether it occurs generally
and springs from a collectively present dynamic pattern. In that case it
should not be classed as subjective, but as psychologically objective,
since an indefinite number of individuals find themselves prompted by an
inner impulse to make an identical statement, or feel a certain view to
be a vital necessity. Since the archetype is not just an inactive form,
but a real force charged with a specific energy, it may very well be
regarded as the cause efifieiem‘ of such statements, and be understood
as the subject of them. In other words, it is not the personal human being
who is making the statement, but the archetype speaking through him. If
these statements are stifled or disregarded, both medical experience and
common knowledge demonstrate that psychic troubles are in store. These
will appear either as neurotic symptoms or, in the case of persons who
are incapable of neurosis, as collective delusions.

Archetypal statements are based upon instinctive preconditions and have
nothing to do with reason; they are neither rationally grounded nor can
they be banished by rational arguments. They have always been part of
the world scene -- representations collectives, as Le’vy-Bruhl rightly
called them. Certainly the ego and its will have a great part to play
in life; but what the ego wills is subject in the highest degree to the
interference, in ways of which the ego is usually unaware, of the autonomy
and numinosity of archetypal processes. Practical consideration of these
processes is the essence of religion, insofar as religion can be approached
from a psychological point of view.
