---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XLV
    Page: 79-80
Title: A good declaring of some certain deceits that may befall in this work
---
But one thing I tell thee, that in this work may a young disciple that
hath not yet been well used and proved in ghostly working, full lightly be
deceived; and, but he be soon wary, and have grace to leave off and meek
him to counsel, peradventure be destroyed in his bodily powers and fall
into fantasy in his ghostly wits. And all this is along of pride, and of
fleshliness and curiosity of wit.

And on this manner may this deceit befall. A young man or a woman new set
to the school of devotion heareth this sorrow and this desire be read and
spoken： how that a man shall lift up his heart unto God, and unceasingly
desire for to feel the love of his God. And as fast in a curiosity of wit they
conceive these words not ghostly as they be meant, but fleshly and bodily;
and travail their fleshly hearts outrageously in their breasts. And what for
lacking of grace and pride and curiosity in themselves, they strain their veins
and their bodily powers so beastly and so rudely, that within short time they
fall either into frenzies, weariness, and a manner of unlisty feebleness in
body and in soul, the which maketh them to wend out of themselves and seek
some false and some vain fleshly and bodily comfort without, as it were for
recreation of body and of spirit： or else, if they fall not in this, else
they merit for ghostly blindness, and for fleshly chafing of their nature
in their bodily breasts in the time of this feigned beastly and not ghostly
working, for to have their breasts either enflamed with an unkindly heat
of nature caused of misruling of their bodies or of this feigned working,
or else they conceive a false heat wrought by the Fiend, their ghostly enemy,
caused of their pride and of their fleshliness and their curiosity of wit. And
yet peradventure they ween it be the fire of love, gotten and kindled by the
grace and the goodness of the Holy Ghost. Truly, of this deceit, and of the
branches thereof, spring many mischiefs： much hypocrisy, much heresy, and
much error. For as fast after such a false feeling cometh a false knowing in
the Fiend’s school, right as after a true feeling cometh a true knowing in
God’s school. For I tell thee truly, that the devil hath his contemplatives
as God hath His.

This deceit of false feeling, and of false knowing following thereon, hath
diverse and wonderful variations, after the diversity of states and the
subtle conditions of them that be deceived： as hath the true feeling and
knowing of them that be saved. But I set no more deceits here but those with
the which I trow thou shalt be assailed if ever thou purpose thee to work in
this work. For what should it profit to thee to wit how these great clerks,
and men and women of other degrees than thou art, be deceived? Surely right
nought; and therefore I tell thee no more but those that fall unto thee if
thou travail in this work. And therefore I tell thee this, for thou shalt
be wary therewith in thy working, if thou be assailed therewith.
