---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Disciplines and Spiritual Practice
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 158-159
  Source:
    Title: The Miracle of Mindfulness
By: Thich Nhat Hanh
Title: A Day of Mindfulness
Format: mixed
---
Every day and every hour, one should practice mindfulness. That’s easy
to say, but to carry it out in practice is not. That's why I suggest to
those who come to the meditation sessions that each person should try hard
to reserve one day out of the week to devote entirely to their practice of
mindfulness. In principle, of course, every day should be your day, and
every hour your hour. But the fact is that very few of us have reached
such a point. We have the impression that our family, place of work,
and society rob us of all our time. So I urge that everyone set aside
one day each week. Saturday, perhaps. If it is Saturday, then Saturday
must be entirely your day, a day during which you are completely the
master. Then Saturday will be the lever that will lift you to the habit
of practicing mindfulness. Every worker in a peace or service community,
no matter how urgent its work, has the right to such a day, for without
it we will lose ourselves quickly in a life full of worry and action, and
our responses will become increasingly useless. Whatever the day chosen,
it can be considered as the day of mindfulness.

While still lying in bed, begin slowly to follow your breath -- slow, long,
and conscious breaths. Then slowly rise from bed (instead of turning out
all at once as usual), nourishing mindfulness by every motion. Once up,
brush your teeth, wash your face, and do all your morning activities
in a calm and relaxing way, each movement done in mindfulness. Follow
your breath, take hold ofit, and don't let your thoughts scatter. Each
movement should be done calmly. Measure your steps with quiet, long
breaths. Maintain a half smile.

Spend at least a half hour taking a bath. Bathe slowly and mindfully, so
that by the time you have finished, you feel light and refreshed. Afterward,
you might do household work such as washing dishes, dusting and
wiping off the tables, scrubbing the kitchen floor, arranging books
on their shelves. Whatever the tasks, do them slowly and with ease, in
mindfulness. Don't do any task in order to get it over with. Resolve to
do each job in a relaxed way, with all your attention. Enjoy and be one
with your work. Without this, the clay of mindfulness will be of no value
at all. The feeling that any task is a nuisance will soon disappear ifit is
done in mindfulness. Take the example of the Zen Masters. No matter what task
or motion they undertake, they do it slowly and evenly, without reluctance.

For those who are just beginning to practice, it is best to maintain a
spirit of silence throughout the day. That doesn’t mean that on the day
of mindfulness, you shouldn’t speak at all. You can talk, you can even
go ahead and sing, but if you talk or sing, do it in complete mindfulness
of what you are saying or singing, and keep talking and singing to a
minimum. Naturally, it is possible to sing and practice mindfulness at
the same time, just as long as one is conscious of the fact that one
is singing and aware of what one is singing. But be warned that it is
much easier, when singing or talking, to stray from mindfulness ifyour
meditation strength is still weak.

At lunchtime, prepare a meal for yourself. Cook the meal and wash
the dishes in mindfulness. In the morning, after you have cleaned and
straightened up your house, and in the afternoon, after you have worked
in the garden or watched clouds or gathered flowers, prepare a pot of
tea to sit and drink in mindfulness. Allow yourselfa good length of
time to do this. Don't drink your tea like someone who gulps down a
cup ofcoffee during a workbreak. Drink your tea slowly and reverently,
as ifit is the axis on which the whole earth revolves-slowly, evenly,
without rushing toward the future. Live the actual moment. Only this
actual moment is life. Don't be attached to the future. Don’t worry
about things you have to do. Don't think about getting up or taking off
to do anything. Don’t think about “departing.”

Be a bud sitting quietly in the hedge Be a smile, one part of wondrous
existence Stand here. There is no need to depart. This homeland is as
beautiful as the homeland of our childhood Do not harm it, please, and
continue to sing ... ("Butterfly Over the Field of Golden Mustard Flowers")

In the evening, you might read scripture and copy passages, write
letters to friends, or do anything else you enjoy outside of your normal
duties during the week. But whatever you do, do it in mindfulness. Eat
only a little for the evening meal. Later, around [0 or 11 o‘clock,
as you sit in meditation, you will be able to sit more easily on an
empty stomach. Afterward you might take a slow walk in the fresh night
air, following your breath in mindfulness and measuring the length of
your breaths by your steps. Finally, return to your room and sleep in
mindfulness.

Somehow we must find a way to allow each worker a day of mindfulness. Such a
day is crucial, lts effect on the other days of the week is immeasurable. Ten
years ago, thanks to such a day of mindfulness, Chu Van and our other
sisters and brothers in the Tiep Hien Order were able to guide themselves
through many difficult times. After only three months of observing such
a day of mindfulness once a week, I know that you will see a significant
change in your life. The day of mindfulness will begin to penetrate the
other days of the week, enabling you to eventually live seven days a week
in mindfulness. I’m sure you agree with me on the day of mindfulness’s
importance!
