---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 656-657
Tags:
  - Beauty-Peace=The Surface Of The Waters=Dominating the Waters
  - 170
Description: Sufic Tradition
Commentary: The story typifies the Islamic attitude toward music, where it is
  classic first to reject (rationally) for its potential abuses an art form
  which is sunbsequently accepted (spiritually) for its essentially divine
  qualities.
---
It was the custom for Sidi 'Abderrahmân when the sea was calm to float on the
waters off Algiers, seated on his prayer carpet. One day on a beach he came
upon a poor shepherd who played a small flute (qashbût), and who was so
absorbed in his melody that he did not even hear the Shaykh’s salâm. He had
promised to play for three days in a row if God would grant him the child he
had long sought to have, and filled with gratitude and joy in seeing his wish
accorded, he had undertaken to play for forty days. Now Sidi 'Abderrahmân did
not like the flute, which certain traditions would have to be the instrument of
Iblis (the devil), who solaces his eternal anguish by wailing through its
reeds.

He declared that this way of thanking God was absurd. ‘The Lord does not accept
such homage. I am going to teach thee something which will reconcile thee to
Him.’ And he taught the shepherd the Fâtihah, together with the rites of
prayer. Then he launched his rug once more and floated out to sea.

The shepherd tried to recite the formula he had just learned. But he got
confused; he had forgotten a line. Heeding nothing but his zeal, he ran after
the saint to have his help in recalling the words; and thus he walked on the
sea. The saint, the sage, had need of a carpet to stay miraculously afloat on
the waves, and here was this ignorant man walking on them barefoot. Sidi
'Abderrahmân understood the lesson and spoke to the uneducated shepherd, this
man of good will, in quoting the first hadith from the sahlh of al-Bukhârî：

‘Continue, O my brother, to play for Him. Innamâ ’l-a'mâl bi-n-nîyât. Verily
the act is in the intention.’
