---
Source:
  ID: 9b46ca4f-1aa2-4bb5-b55b-846ecd88e159
  Locus:
    Page: 1-3
By: Martin Laird
References:
  - Title: Luke
    Locus: 10 42
---
We are built for contemplation. ... Communion with God in the Silence of
the heart is a God-given capacity, like the rhododendron’s capacity to
flower, the fledgling’s for flight, and the child’s for self-forgetful
abandon and joy. If the grace of God that suffuses and simplifies the vital
generosity of our lives does not consummate this capacity while we live, then
the very arms of God that embrace us as we enter the transforming mystery
of death will surely do so. This self-giving God, the Being of our being,
the Life of our life, has joined to Himself two givens of human life： we
are built to commune with God and we will all meet death.

Whether we discover the unum necessarium, the “one thing necessary,” (Lk
10 42) during the time we are given in our lives, or whether this realization
comes to us only as it came to Tolstoy’s Ivan lllyich, who, finally
reconciled with his sad, misshapen life so that he could move through death,
exclaimed injoy at his great discovery, "And Death? Where is it? ... There
is no more death," God is our homeland. And the homing instinct of the human
being is horned on God. As St. Augustine put it "we must fly to our beloved
homeland. There the Father is, and there is everything.”

\... In his Maxims on Love, St John of the Cross says, "The Father spoke one
Word, which was his Son, and this Word he speaks always in eternal silence,
and in silence must be heard by the soul.” In his Letter Seven, the same
Spanish that says, “Our greatest need is to be silent before this great
God. ... for the only language he hears is the silent language of love.“
Silence is an urgent necessity for us; Silence is necessary if we are to
hear God speaking in eternal silence; our ovm Silence is necessary if God
is to hear us. Silence is' necessary because, as Maggie Ross boldly puts it,
“Salvation is about Silence.”

These mutual silences are the terrain of the silent land. But unlike other
landscapes there is no definitive map of this land of Silence. ...

The practice of silence, what I shall call “contemplative practice” or
simply “practice” cannot be reduced to a spiritual technique. Techniques
are all the rage today. They suggest a certain control that aims to
determine a certain outcome. They clearly have their place. But this is not
what contemplative practice does. The difference may be slight but it is an
important one. A spiritual practice simply disposes us to allow something to
take place. For example, a gardener does not actually grow plants. A gardener
practices certain gardening skills that facilitate growth that is beyond the
gardener’s direct control. In a similar way, a sailor cannot produce the
necessary wind that moves the boat. A sailor practices sailing skills that
harness the gift of wind that brings the sailor home, but there is nothing
the sailor can do to make the wind blow. And so it is with contemplative
practice, not a technique, but a skill. The skill required is interior silence.

God is our homeland. Dominant initiatives afoot at the present time, however,
seem rather convinced that they know what God thmks, what lands God is giving
to some, what lands God is taking from others. Lands of ideology, lands of
aggression and violence, lands of tribal egocentricity threaten to overtake
the land of hope and glory, directing the pomp and circumstance to themselves.

This silence is all pervading, from the innermost depths of the human being,
whose margins are God's margins, to the widest embrace of human compassion.
\... Let us joumey home, then, to the silence of our own fathoms by becoming
still.
