---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Source:
    ID: ce3f70aa-4448-4cfd-a1b7-4a32eb5e8df0
    Title: I Ching
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 5 - ䷄ - Hsu
    Line: 1
    Page: 38-39
By: Frederick the Great
---
HENRI DE CATT. Verses, Sire! And tomorrow Your Majesty will battle!

FREDERICK THE GREAT. Well, what is there so extraordinary in that? Can I not,
like anybody else, employ myself on verses and amuse myself by making some,
perhaps pretty bad ones? I have given my mind the whole day to the capital
affair, which I have turned about in all ways. My plan is made, my decision
taken. I may well be permitted, it seems to me, to scribble and rhyme just
like anybody else.

DE CATT. Nobody, Sire, will dispute that permission. I say merely that in
so critical a moment as must be the moment of giving battle, it is very
difficult to find any inclination to versify.

FREDERICK. When you have been accustomed for a long time, as I have been, to
all this brawl of battle, you will not think it so strange that, on the eve
of the day on which a battle is to be fought, anyone should amuse himself as
I am doing. Besides, sir, I am not composing; I am endeavoring to correct an
author and to do better than he, if it is possible. When you left me today,
I wished to read Rousseau’s “Ode to Fortune,” and, in opening my book,
I fell on “Ode to Count de Sinzendorff,” two strophes of which seemed to
me rather ill-written. A moment’s patience, sir. I have the last strophe
to look over and rewrite. I shall soon be done, and I will show you my fine
work. (Frederick writes.) ... Here it is; perhaps, for a day of fatigue as
this has been, you will find that the poet has again come off well with his
great work.

DE CATT. Yes, Sire, Your Majesty has come off well in such a moment. I doubt
whether the generals whom you have and will have to combat ever write verses
on the eve of a battle.

FREDERICK. I have a better opinion of them than you have. They would write
verses just as I do, if they knew how. This little exercise refreshes your
head and your ideas, and I have great need for both my head and my ideas to
be fresh.
