---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 461
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Powers of Darkness
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
By: The Marquis de Luchet
References:
  - Body: |
      Somehow they (the "Berlin Brotherhood”) all seemed to me to be men
      without souls. They were desperate, determined seekers into realms of
      being with which earth had no sympathy, and which in consequence
      abstracted them from all human feelings or human emotions.

      Not one of them, that I can remember, ever manifested any genial
      qualities or seemed to delight in social exercises. They were
      profound, philosophic, isolated men, pursuing from mere necessity, or
      as a cloak to the stupendous secrets of their existence, some
      scientific occupation, yet in their innermost natures lost to earth
      and its sweet humanities： living amongst men, but partaking neither of
      their vices nor their virtues.

      In their companionship I felt abandoned of my kind. ... If the
      knowledge I had purchased was indeed a reality, there were times when
      I deemed it was neither good nor lawful for man to possess it. I often
      envied the peaceful unconsciousness of the outer world, and would
      gladly have gone back to the simple faith of my childhood, and then
      have closed my eyes in eternal sleep sooner than awaken to the
      terrible unrest which had possessed me since I had crossed the safe
      boundaries of the visible, and entered upon the illimitable wastes of
      the invisible.
    Source: Ghost Land, pp. 47-48
  - Body: |
      One must speak, first in one way. then in another, so as not to commit
      oneself and to make one's real way of thinking impenetrable to one's
      inferiors. ... One asserts that all events in the world occur from a
      hundred secret springs and causes, to which secret associations above
      all belong： one arouses the pleasure of quiet, hidden power and of
      insight into hidden secrets.
    Source: Adam Weishaupt： Nachtrag von weitern Originalschriften, Munich.
      1787. I. 12. and Einige Originalschriften des IUuminatenordens, Munich.
      1787. p. 51： Webster, op. cit.. pp. 2 2 0 - 22 1).
---
A new society of beings has formed in the midst of thickest darkness,
who know one another without being seen, who understand one another
without explanations, who serve one another without friendship. The
object of this society is to govern the world (This) gigantic project
(entails) a series of calamities of which the end is lost in the
darkness of time, like unto those subterranean fires of which the
insatiable activity devours the bowels of the earth and which escape
into the air by violent and devastating explosions.
