---
Source:
  ID: 7593ef1f-e8a3-4f07-9af6-def46ad4ebc3
  Title: The Way of Chuang Tzu
  Editor: Thomas Merton
  Contributor: Thomas Merton
  By: Chuang Tzu
  Source:
    ID: e6a8d459-c618-4308-977f-da03609dfdf4
    Locus:
      Chapter: IV
      Verse: 1
  Locus:
    Page: 50-53
Title: The Fasting of the Heart
---
Yen Hui, the favorite disciple of Confucius, came to take leave of his
Master.

"Where are you going?" asked Confucius.

"I am going to Wei."

"And what for?"

"I have heard that the Prince of Wei is a lusty fullblooded fellow and is
entirely self-willed. He takes no care of his people and refuses to see
any fault in himself. He pays no attention to the fact that his subjects
are dying right and left. Corpses lie all over the country like hay in a
field. The people are desperate. But I have heard you, Master, say that
one should leave the state that is well governed and go to that which is in
disorder. At the door of the physician there are plenty of sick people. I
want to take this opportunity to put into practice what I have learned
from you and see if I can bring about some improvement in conditions there."

"Alas!" said Confucius, "you do not realize what you are doing. You will
bring disaster upon yourself. Tao has no need of your eagerness, and you
will only waste your energy in your misguided efforts. Wasting your energy
you will become confused and then anxious. Once anxious, you will no longer
be able to help yourself. The sages of old first sought Tao in themselves,
then looked to see if there was anything in others that corresponded with
Tao as they knew it. But if you do not have Tao yourself, what business
have you spending your time in vain efforts to bring corrupt politicians
into the right path? ... However, I suppose you must have some basis for
your hope of success. How do you propose to go about it?"

Yen Hui replied： "I intend to present myself as a humble, disinterested
man, seeking only to do what is right and nothing else： a completely
simple and honest approach. Will this win his confidence?"

"Certainly not," Confucius replied. "This man is convinced that he alone
is right. He may pretend outwardly to take an interest in an objective
standard of justice, but do not be deceived by his expression. He is not
accustomed to being opposed by anyone. His way is to reassure himself that
he is right by trampling on other people. If he does this with mediocre
men, he will all the more certainly do it to one who presents a threat
by claiming to be a man of high qualities. He will cling stubbornly to
his own way. He may pretend to be interested in your talk about what is
objectively right, but interiorly he will not hear you, and there will
be no change whatever. You will get nowhere with this."

Yen Hui then said： "Very well. Instead of directly opposing him, I
will maintain my own standards interiorly, but outwardly I will appear to
yield. I will appeal to the authority of tradition and to the examples of
the past. He who is interiorly uncompromising is a son of heaven just as
much as any ruler. I will not rely on any teaching of my own, and will
consequently have no concern about whether I am approved or not. I will
eventually be recognized as perfectly disinterested and sincere. They
will all come to appreciate my candor, and thus I will be an instrument
of heaven in their midst.

"In this way, yielding in obedience to the Prince as other men do, bowing,
kneeling, prostrating myself as a servant should, I shall be accepted
without blame. Then others will have confidence in me, and gradually they
will make use of me, seeing that I desire only to make myself useful and
to work for the good of all. Thus I will be an instrument of men.

"Meanwhile, all I have to say will be expressed in terms of ancient
tradition. I will be working with the sacred tradition of the ancient
sages. Though what I say may be objectively a condemnation of the Prince's
conduct, it will not be I who say it, but tradition itself. In this way,
I will be perfectly honest, and yet not give offense. Thus I will be an
instrument of tradition. Do you think I have the right approach?"

"Certainly not," said Confucius. "You have too many different plans
of action, when you have not even got to know the Prince and observed
his character! At best, you might get away with it and save your skin,
but you will not change anything whatever. He might perhaps superficially
conform to your words, but there will be no real change of heart." Yen Hui
then said： "Well, that is the best I have to offer. Will you, Master,
tell me what you suggest?"

"You must fast!" said Confucius. "Do you know what I mean by fasting? It
is not easy. But easy ways do not come from God."

"Oh," said Yen Hui, "I am used to fasting! At home we were poor. We went
for months without wine or meat. That is fasting, is it not?"

"Well, you can call it 'observing a fast' if you like," said Confucius,
"but it is not the fasting of the heart."

"Tell me," said Yen Hui, "what is fasting of the heart?"

Confucius replied： "The goal of fasting is inner unity. This means
hearing, but not with the ear; hearing, but not with the understanding;
hearing with the spirit, with your whole being. The hearing that is only
in the ears is one thing. The hearing of the understanding is another. But
the hearing of the spirit is not limited to any one faculty, to the ear,
or to the mind. Hence it demands the emptiness of all the faculties. And
when the faculties are empty, then the whole being listens. There is then
a direct grasp of what is right there before you that can never be heard
with the ear or understood with the mind. Fasting of the heart empties
the faculties, frees you from limitation and from preoccupation. Fasting
of the heart begets unity and freedom."

"I see," said Yen Hui. "What was standing in my way was my own
self-awareness. If I can begin this fasting of the heart, self-awareness
will vanish. Then I will be free from limitation and preoccupation! Is
that what you mean?"

"Yes," said Confucius, "that's itl If you can do this, you will be able
to go among men in their world without upsetting them. You will not enter
into conflict with their ideal image of themselves. If they will listen,
sing them a song. If not, keep silent. Don't try to break down their
door. Don't try out new medicines on them. Just be there among them,
because there is nothing else for you to be but one of them. Then you
may have success!

"It is easy to stand still and leave no trace, but it is hard to walk
without touching the ground. If you follow human methods, you can get
away with deception. In the way of Tao, no deception is possible.

"You know that one can fly with wings： you have not yet learned about
flying without wings. You are familiar with the wisdom of those who know,
but you have not yet learned the wisdom of those who know not.

"Look at this window： it is nothing but a hole in the wall, but because
of it the whole room is full of light. So when the faculties are empty,
the heart is full of light. Being full of light it becomes an influence
by which others are secretly transformed."
