---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 529
Tags:
  - Life-Love=Prayer-Meditation-Contemplation=On Distraction
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Consummation of Desire
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Eye of the Heart
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Know Thyself
By: Richard of Saint-Victor
---
Leah is the affection enflamed by divine inspiration. Rachel the
reason illumined by divine revelation. ... Each of them therefore
receives her handmaid： the servant of the affections is sensation,
that of reason is the imagination. But each of these handmaids is
known to be necessary to her mistress, for without them the whole
world would not be of use to them. For the reason would know nothing
without the imagination and the affections would feel nothing without
the sensibility. ...

We have seen how the two handmaids can be of service but I think we
must not be silent about their vices. For Bilhah is garrulous and
Zilpah drunken. For not even Rachel her mistress can repress Bilhah’s
loquaciousness and not even the generosity of Zilpah's mistress can
satisfy her thirst. The wine Zilpah desires is the joy of pleasures,
of which the more she drinks the greedier is her thirst, for the whole
world will not suffice to satiate her lustful appetite. However much
she drinks she is always gasping for more drink, and is rightly called
Zilpah. that is a ’gasping mouth', thirst that is never extinguished.
But the imagination cries out with such importunity in the ears of the
heart that Rachel can hardly ever silence her clamouring. This is the
reason why. when we are saying psalms or praying, though we would shut
out phantasies of thought or the images of things from the eyes of our
heart, we are unable to do so. And because every day we know by
experience and unwillingly suffer this clamouring, we know how great
is Bilhah’s garrulity. Everything we have seen or heard and especially
what we ourselves have done and said is brought back to our memory and
she never ceases to repeat again and again what she has already told.
Moreover though the will gives no consent to hearing, she continues to
tell her tale though no one is listening. She is like decrepit old men
or a senile woman who will drone on without any audience and carry on
a conversation as if someone were present. Hence Bilhah is not
undeservedly called ‘inveterate* for she copies the ways of such old
people. But surely everybody knows Bilhah's garrulity and Zilpah's
drunkenness unless they do not know themselves!
