---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 208-209
  Source:
    Title: The Rebirth of Nature
By: Rupert Sheldrake
References:
  - ID: ce69538d-b57d-4b38-b061-76deec5bf954
Title: Rituals and Morphic Resonance
---
All societies have their rituals, such as those of the seasonal festivals, the
rituals of birth, marriage, and death, and the rituals that commemorate and
reenact original events, charged with spiritual power, on which the social
and religious group depends. For example, the Jewish feast ofPassover
recalls the original Passover dinner on the night when the firstborn
of the Egyptians and their cattle were destroyed, after which the Jews
began their journey out of bondage in Egypt. The Christian celebration of
the Eucharist commemorates the last supper of Jesus with his disciples,
itself a Passover dinner. The American national festival of Thanksgiving
recalls the first thanksgiving dinner of the Pilgrims after their first
harvests in the New World.

A general feature of all rituals is that they are intensely conservative. In
order to work properly, they are supposed to be performed in the correct
and customary manner. In many parts of the world, the very language
ofritual is archaic, preserving the traditional form of words believed
to be necessary for their efficacy. The liturgy of the Coptic church in
Egypt is still carried out in the ancient Egyptian tongue; the Brahminic
rituals of India, in Sanskrit.

Through this ritual participation, the past becomes present. The present
participants are linked to all those who have gone before -- to the
ancestors, and ultimately to the primal creative moment the ritual
commemorates, in Christianity, for example, this is the basis of the
doctrine of the Communion of Saints. The sacred time of the mass is not
only linked with that ofpreceding and following masses;

"it can also he looked upon as a continuation of all the Masses which have
taken place from the moment when the mystery of transubstantiation was
first established until the present moment. ... What is true of time in
Christian worship is equally true of time in all religions, in magic, in
myth and in legend. A ritual does not merely repeat the ritual that came
before it (it self a repetition of an archetype), but it, linked to it and
continues it, whether at fixed period; or otherwise." (Mircea Eliade, 1958)

Why are rituals so conservative? And why do people all over the world
believe that through ritual activities they are participating in a process
that takes them out of ordinary secular time and somehow brings the past
into the present? The idea of morphic resonance provides a natural answer
to these questions. Through morphic resonance, ritual really can bring the
past into the present. The present performers of the ritual indeed connect
with those in the past. The greater the similarity between the way the
ritual is performed now and the way it was performed before, the stronger
the resonant connection between the past and present participants.
