---
Tags:
  - Trials=Liberation
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 378-379
  Source:
    Title: Who Dies?
By: Stephen Levine
---
Once someone asked a well-known Thai meditation master, “In this world
where everything changes, where nothing remains the same, where loss
and grief are inherent in our very coming into existence, how can there
be any happiness? How can we find security when we see that we can’t
count on anything being the way we want it to be?” The teacher, looking
compassionately at this fellow, held up a drinking glass which had been given
to him earlier in the morning and said, “You see this goblet? For me, this
glass is already broken. I enjoy it, I drink out of it. It holds my water
admirably, sometimes even reflecting the sun in beautiful patterns. IfI
should tap it, it has a lovely ring to it. But when I put this glass on
a shelf and the wind knocks it over or my elbow brushes it off the table
and it falls to the ground and shatters, I say, ‘Of course.’ But when
I understand that this glass is already broken, every moment with it is
precious. Every moment is just as it is and nothing need be otherwise.”

When we recognize that, just as that glass, our body is already broken,
that indeed we are already dead, then life becomes precious and we open
to it just as it is, in the moment it is occurring. When we understand
that all our loved ones are already dead -- our children, our mates,
our friends -- how precious they become. How little fear can interpose,
how little doubt can estrange us. When you live your life as though
you’re already dead, life takes on new meaning. Each moment becomes a
whole lifetime, a universe unto itself.

When we realize we are already dead, our priorities change, our heart opens,
our mind begins to clear of the fog of old holdings and pretendings. We
watch all life in transit and what matters becomes instantly apparent：
The transmission of love, the letting go of obstacles to understanding,
the relinquishment of our grasping, of our hiding from ourselves. Seeing
the mercilessness ofour self-strangulation, we begin to come gently into
the light we share with all beings. Taking each teaching, each loss,
each gain, each fear, each joy as it arises and experiencing it fully,
life becomes workable. We are no longer “a victim oflifei.” And
then every experience, even the loss of our dearest one, becomes another
opportunity for awakening.

If our only spiritual practice were to live as though we were already
dead, relating to all We meet, to all we do, as though it were our final
moments in the world, what time would there be for old games or falsehoods
or posturing? If we lived our life as though we were already dead, as
though our children were already dead, how much time would there be for
selfprotection and the re-creation ofancient mirages? Only love would be
appropriate, only the truth.
