---
By: Sir Alan Patrick Herbert
Source:
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "5 - ䷄ - Hsu"
    Line: 5
    Page: 41-43
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
---
May I say how disappointed I am at some of the talk in some of the papers --
this very gloomy talk, with petulant letters saying, "What, after all,
have we to celebrate?" Surely right honourable and honourable Members
on this side of the House, at least, will agree that if, in 1951, we have
survived five years of war, and five years of His Majesty's Government,
then even they will have something they will like to celebrate, to dance
and sing about. "Faith," 1 think Mr. G. K. Chesterton said, "is the
capacity to believe in that which is demonstrably untrue." If that is the
only sort of confidence we have in our future, then let us have that.

I think there are other causes. I am no historian; but if the House will bear
with me for one more minute, I will present another historical reason why we
should celebrate, not only with the main exhibition, but with the arrangements
set out in this bill. After all, we are emerging from the murky forties into
the fifties, and it has been pointed out to me by a better historian than
myself that the forties have always been a pretty wretched sort of decade. A
hundred years ago there were the Hungry Forties, with the whole of Europe in
chaos and revolution, with The Communist Manifesto, with crowned heads falling
everywhere and rulers taking refuge in this island, and with the Chartists
massing on Kennington Common. However, after that period we emerged into
what was almost the most prosperous, happy period in this country's history.

In the 1740's, I think, we were at war with France, Spain, and Scotland. A
predecessor of mine in this House, Sir Charles Oman, records that when Charles
Edward arrived at Derby, "Panic prevailed in London, the King's plate
had been sent on shipboard, the Bank of England had paid away every guinea
of its reserves, and the citizens of London were fully persuaded that they
would be attacked next day by ten thousand wild Scottish clansmen."

In the 1640's there was civil war and King Charles I had his head cut
off. In the 1540's, I see, "The time was a very evil one for England."
King Henry VIII was marrying too many women, executing too many men, and
persecuting everybody else. I need hardly add that we were at war with
Scotland, and France as well; but the historian adds, rather woundingly,
that "the French War was far more dangerous." In the 1440's we had a
weak king, King Henry VI. We were at war with France, and we were gradually
losing everything King Henry V had won. ... In the 1340's we were at war
with France, and the Scots invaded the north of England. Also, a small detail,
there was the Black Death. In the 1240's we invaded France.

In the 1140's we were ruled by an unpleasant woman called Matilda and there
was civil war all the time. In the 1040's we were invaded by the Danes.
Now, whatever else may be laid at the door of His Majesty's Government,
we are not now at war with France or Scotland or even Denmark, and I do
not think that we shall be in 1951; and my hope is that in some way we
shall emerge from the 1940's into the fifties in such condition that we
shall be justified in celebrating. But if not, even if we are going down,
it is not the habit of the British fleet to haul down the ensign when about
to begin a doubtful engagement. On the contrary, each ship flies two or
three to make sure that one shall be seen. It is in that spirit, I feel,
that we ought to go forward with this bold, imaginative, attractive scheme,
and show, whether we go up or down, that we can be gracious, gallant, and gay.
