---
Source:
  Title: Odes to a Classic Hundred Standards
  Translator: Gregory Winderwheel
  By: Xuedou Zhongxian
  ID: 5a0c4642-20c8-46c0-8073-7434833fa6b4
Locus:
  Case: 73
Title: Master Ma's White and Black
---
For someone who is a master explaining the Dharma, there
is no explaining and there is no pointing. For someone who is one
listening to the Dharma, there is no hearing and there is no
attaining. Explaining is already without explaining and without
pointing;

to strive thus is not explaining. Listening is already without hearing
and without attaining; to strive thus is not listening. Accordingly,
those without explaining and without listening, however are relatively
few. Just so, now you various people listening to this mountain monk
with an explanation of that other side, how do you make it alive to
avoid attaining these mistakes? For those who possess the eye to pass
through the checkpoints, a test is raised to examine it

A monk asked Grand Master Ma (Mazu, J. Baso),
Abandoning the four phrases and renouncing the 100 negations, I beg
Master to directly point to the meaning of that First Certain Someones
coming from the West.

Master Ma said, Today, I toiled and am weary and do not
have the energy to explain it for you. Take the question to Zhizang,
(J. Chizo) and go away.

The monk asked Zhizang. Zang said, Why dont you ask
the Venerable?

The monk said, The Venerable instructed me to come and
ask.

Zang said, Today my head aches, and I dont have the
energy to explain it for you. Take the question to Elder Brother Hai
and go away.

The monk asked Elder Brother Hai (J. Kai).

Hai said, I arrived at this side, but still I dont
understand.

The monk raised it to show to Grand Master Ma.

Master Ma said, Zangs head is white; Hais head is
black.

Xuedou's ode says

Zangs head is white; Hais head is black.

Clear-eyed patchrobed monks understand they dont attain it.

The horse colt trampled and killed the people under heaven

Linji is not yet a thief snatching in the white.

Abandoning the four phrases and renouncing the 100 negations,

Between heaven above and the people, only I know.
