---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 9 - ䷈ - Ch'u
    Line: 4
    Page: 68-69
By: Alessandrro Manzoni
---
The resolution of Lodovico [to become a Capuchin monk after killing
someone] came very apropos for his hosts, who were in a sad dilemma on
his account. To send him away from the convent, and thus expose him to
justice, that is to say, to the vengeance of his enemies, was a course on
which they would not for a moment bestow a thought. It would have been to
give up their proper privileges, disgrace the convent in the eyes of the
people, draw upon themselves the animadversion of all the Capuchins in the
universe for suffering their common rights to be infringed upon, and arouse
all the ecclesiastical authorities, who at that time considered themselves
the lawful guardians of these rights. On the other hand, the kindred of the
slain, powerful themselves, and strong in adherents, were prepared to take
vengeance, and denounced as their enemy any one who should put an obstacle
in their way. This history does not tell us that much grief was felt for
the loss of the deceased, nor even that a single tear was shed over him
by any of his relations; it merely says that they were all on fire to have
the murderer, dead or living, in their power. But Lodovico’s assuming the
habit of a Capuchin settled all these difficulties; he made atonement in a
manner, imposed a penance on himself, tacitly confessed himself in fault,
and withdrew from the contest; he was, in fact, an enemy laying down his
arms. The relatives of the dead could also, if they pleased, believe and
make it their boast that he had turned friar in despair, and through dread of
their vengeance. But in any case, to oblige a man to relinquish his property,
shave his head, and walk barefoot, to sleep on straw, and to live upon alms,
was surely a punishment fully equivalent to the most heinous offense.

The Superior presented himself with an easy humility to the brother of
the deceased, and after a thousand protestations of respect for his most
illustrious house, and of desire to comply with his wishes as far as was
possible, he spoke of Lodovico’s penitence, and the determination he
had made, politely making it appear that his family ought to he therefore
satisfied, and insinuating, yet more courteously, and with still greater
dexterity, that whether he were pleased or not, so it would be. The brother
fell into a rage, which the Capuchin patiently allowed to evaporate,
occasionally remarking that he had too just cause for sorrow. The Signor
also gave him to understand, that in any case his family had it in their
power to enforce satisfaction, to which the Capuchin, whatever he might
think, did not say no; and finally he asked, or rather required as a
condition, that the murderer of his brother should immediately quit
the city. The Capuchin, who had already determined upon such a course,
replied that it should be as he wished, leaving the nobleman to believe,
if he chose, that his compliance was an act of obedience, and thus the
matter was concluded to the satisfaction of all parties.
