---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 371-373
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - 120
  - 191
By: St John of the Cross
References:
  - Title: Psalms
    Locus: XVIII 4-5
  - Title: Psalms
    Locus: LXXXVIII 5-7
  - Title: Lamentations
    Locus: III 8
  - Title: Lamentations
    Locus: III 29
---
Because the light and wisdom of this contemplation is most bright and pure,
and the soul which it assails is dark and impure,, it follows that the soul
suffers great pain when it receives it in itself, just as, when the eyes
are dimmed by humour, and become impure and weak, they suffer pain through
the assault of the bright light. And when the soul is indeed assailed by this
Divine light, its pain, which results from its impurity, is immense： because,
when this pure light assails the soul, in order to expel its impurity, the
soul feels itself to be so impure and miserable that it believes God to be
against it, and thinks that it has set itself up against God. ... Beneath
the power of this oppression and weight the soul feels itself so far from
being favoured that it thinks, and correctly so, that even that wherein it
was wont to find some help has vanished with everything else, and that there
is none who has pity upon it. ...

A description of this suffering and pain, although in truth it transcends
all description, is given by David, when he says： The lamentations of
death compassed me about： the pains of hell surrounded me; I cried in
my tribulation. But what the sorrowful soul feels most in this condition
is its clear perception, as it thinks, that God has abandoned it, and, in
His abhorrence of it, has flung it into darkness; it is a grave and piteous
grief for it to believe that God has forsaken it. It is this that David also
felt so much in a like case, saying： After the manner wherein the wounded
are dead in the sepulchres, being now abandoned by Thy hand, so that Thou
rememberest them no more, even so have they set me in the deepest and lowest
lake, in dark places and in the shadow of death, and Thy fury is confirmed
upon me and all Thy waves Thou hast discharged upon me.

Here God greatly humbles the soul in order that He may afterwards greatly
exalt it; and if He ordained not that these feelings should be quickly lulled
to sleep when they arise within the soul, it would forsake the body in a
very few days; but at intervals there occur times when it is not conscious
of their greatest intensity. At times, however, they are so keen that the
soul seems to be seeing hell and perdition opened. Of such are they that
in truth go down alive into hell, for here on earth they are purged in the
same manner as there, since this purgation is that which would have to be
accomplished there. And thus the soul that passes through this either enters
not that place at all, or tarries there but for a very short time： for
one hour of purgation here is more profitable than are many there. ...

There is added to all this (because of the solitude and abandonment caused
in it by this dark night), the fact that it finds no consolation or support
in any instruction nor in a spiritual master. For, although in many ways its
director may show it good cause for being comforted in the blessings which are
contained in these afflictions, it cannot believe him. For it is so greatly
absorbed and immersed in the realization of those evils wherein it sees
its own miseries so clearly, that it thinks that, as its director observes
not that which it sees and feels, he is speaking in this manner because he
understands it not： and so, instead of comfort, it rather receives fresh
affliction, since it believes that its director’s advice contains no remedy
for its troubles. And, in truth, this is so; for, until the Lord shall have
completely purged it after the manner that He wills, no means or remedy is
of any service or profit for the relief of its affliction. ... And if it
sometimes prays it does so with such lack of strength and of sweetness that
it thinks that God neither hears it nor pays heed to it： ... When I cry and
entreat, He hath shut out my prayer. In truth this is no time for the soul
to speak with God; it should rather put its mouth in the dust, as Jeremiah
says, so that perchance there may come to it some present hope, and it may
endure its purgation with patience. It is God who is working here in the soul;
wherefore the soul can do nothing. Hence it can neither pray nor be present
at the Divine offices and pay attention to them, much less can it attend to
other things and affairs which are temporal. Not only so, but it has likewise
such distractions and times of such profound forgetfulness of the memory,
that frequent periods pass by without its knowing what it has been doing or
thinking, or what it is that it is doing or is going to do, neither can it
pay attention, although it desire to do so, to anything that occupies it.
