---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXIV
    Page: 56
Title: What charity is in itself, and how it is truly and perfectly
  contained in the work of this book
---
And as it is said of meekness, how that it is truly and perfectly comprehended
in this little blind love pressed, when it is beating upon this dark cloud
of unknowing, all other things put down and forgotten： so it is to be
understood of all other virtues, and specially of charity.

For charity is nought else to bemean to thine understanding, but love of God
for Himself above all creatures, and of man for God even as thyself. And
that in this work God is loved for Himself, and above all creatures, it
seemeth right well. For as it is said before, that the substance of this
work is nought else but a naked intent directed unto God for Himself.

A naked intent I call it. For why, in this work a perfect Prentice asketh
neither releasing of pain, nor increasing of meed, nor shortly to say, nought
but Himself. Insomuch, that neither he recketh nor looketh after whether that
he be in pain or in bliss, else that His will be fulfilled that he loveth. And
thus it seemeth that in this work God is perfectly loved for Himself, and
that above all creatures. For in this work, a perfect worker may not suffer
the memory of the holiest creature that ever God made to commune with him.

And that in this work the second and the lower branch of charity unto thine
evenchristian is verily and perfectly fulfilled, it seemeth by the proof. For
why, in this work a perfect worker hath no special beholding unto any man
by himself, whether that he be kin or stranger, friend or foe. For all men
him thinks equally kin unto him, and no man stranger. All men him thinks
be his friends, and none his foes. Insomuch, that him thinks all those that
pain him and do him disease in this life, they be his full and his special
friends： and him thinketh, that he is stirred to will them as much good,
as he would to the homeliest friend that he hath.
