---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 227-228
  Source:
    Title: The Politics of Women's Spirituality
    Editor: Charlene Spretnak
By: Starhawk
Title: Ethics and Justice in Goddess Religion
---
The Goddess is manifest not just in human life, but in the interwoven
chain of relationships that link all forms oflife. We are not given
dominion over the birds of the air and the fish of the sea; rather, human
life is recognized as part of the animal world. We are conscious, but
consciousness itself is of nature, not separate from nature. And we do
not have the right to damage or destroy other species in order to further
purely human aims. Witches, of course, are not Iains, nor are most of us
vegetarians. The Goddess in Her aspect as the Crone or Reaper and the God
in His aspect of the Hunter embody the principle that all oflife feeds on
other life. Death sustains life. But the hunt, the harvest, the reaping of
herbs -- or of profits -- must be practiced with respect for the balance of
life and its continuation in the greatest possible richness and diversity
of forms. The herds are culled, not obliterated. When herbs are cut, only
a few are taken from each separate clump, so that they may grow back in
future years. Human communities limit their numbers to what the land can
support without straining its resources or displacing other species. We
do not, for example, have the ethical right to destroy a species-- even
the lowly snail darter -- in order to build a dam, regardless of how much
money has already been invested in the project. When we consider ourselves
as a true part of the fabric oflife, then each time we irrevocably destroy
an aspect oflife we have destroyed an aspect of ourselves.

Diversity is highly valued -- as it is in nature -- in a polytheistic
worldview which allows for many powers, many images ofdivinity. In
ecological systems, the greater the diversity of a community, the greater
is its power of resilience, of adaptation in the face of change, and the
greater the chances for survival ofits elements.

Diversity is also valued in human endeavors and creations. Ethics are
concerned with fostering diversity rather than sameness, and they are not
concerned with enforcing a dogma or a party line. Individual conscience --
itself a manifestation of the Goddess -- is the final court of appeals,
above codified laws or hierarchical proclamations.

Such a statement makes many people uneasy. If ethics are based on the
individuals sense of right and wrong, then don't we open ourselves to
the horrors of a Hitler, to crime, anarchy, and blind selfishness? Yes,
ifthe individual selfis seen out of context. But in Goddess religion, the
individual self is never seen as a separate, isolated object： It is a
nexus of interwoven relationships, an integral and inseparable part of the
human and biological community. The Goddess is manifest in the self -- but
also in every other human self, and the biological world. We can not honor
and serve the Goddess in ourselves unless we honor and serve Her in others.
