---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 68-69
  Source:
    Title: No Man Is an Island
By: Thomas Merton
---
We are warmed by fire, not by the smoke of the fire. We are carried over the
sea by a ship, not by the wake ofa ship. So too, what we are is to be sought
in the invisible depths ofour own being, not in our outward reflection in
our own acts. We must find our real selves not in the froth stirred up by
the impact of our being upon the beings around us, but in our own soul,
which is the principle of all our acts.

But my soul is hidden and invisible. I cannot see it directly, for it is
hidden even from myself. Nor can I see my own eyes. They are too close to
me for me to see them. They are not meant to see themselves. I know I have
eyes when I see other things with them.

I can see my eyes in a mirror. My soul can also reflect itselfin the mirror
of its own activity. But what is seen in the mirror is only the reflection
of who I am, not my true being. The mirror of words and actions only partly
manifests my being.

The words and acts that proceed from myself and are accomplished outside myself
are dead things compared with the hidden life from which they spring. These
acts are transient and superficial. They are quickly gone, even though
their effects may persist for a little while. But the soul itself remains.
Much depends on how the soul sees itselfin the mirror of its own activity.

My soul does not find itself unless it acts. Therefore it must act. Stagnation
and inactivity bring spiritual death. But my soul must not project itself
entirely into the outward effects of its activity. I do not need to see myself,
I merely need to be myself. I must think and act like a living being, but
I must not plunge my whole self into what I think and do, or seek always to
find myself in the work I have done. The soul that projects itself entirely
into activity, and seeks itself outside itself in the work of its own will
is like a madman who sleeps on the sidewalk in front of his house instead
of living inside where it is quiet and warm. The soul that throws itself
outdoors in order to find itself in the effects of its own work is like a
fire that has no desire to burn but seeks only to go up in smoke.
