---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 279-280
  Source:
    Title: Waking Up
By: Charles T. Tart
---
Recently I heard a great spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, talk about
promoting world peace. I was very moved by his lecture, for he spoke from
his heart as well as his mind. He stressed the many ways that external
conflicts between people and nations stem from internal conflicts within
ourselves, rather than arising only from external sources. We have to work
on the external reasons for conflict, but if we want lasting external peace,
we must work for it from a solid, inner foundation of personal peace.

There were several other speakers at this meeting. Immediately following His
Holiness's talk, a woman commented from a feminist perspective on peace. She
spoke of the way women have been mistreated in our own and other cultures,
the ways in which war is a masculine activity that hurts women, and the need
for women to use their power to stop war. Her analysis of the way sexism
supports war opened new understandings to me. Intellectually, I agreed
with all the points she made. They were clear, incisive, and very practical.

Emotionally, though, it was a different story. "Illogically," I found
myself growing increasingly angry at her and everything she represented. My
wife felt the same way, as did every other person in the audience with
whom we later spoke. I was disturbed at feeling angry, as I knew it was
both irrational and contrary to my own positive feelings toward feminist
perspectives.

Through self-examination I realized that while the conceptual content
of what she said was fine, indeed noble, the emotional tone of her
talk was angry and aggressive, and aroused an automatic emotional
opposition. Conditioned emotional reactions were aroused in spite of
intellectual acceptance. She illustrated, unfortunately, His Holiness’s
main point. If you don't have peace within yourself, your attempts to
create peace in the outer world can backfire, and may create even more
hostility than if you hadn't done anything.

The fact that I and others automatically grew angry illustrates another
aspect of the horror of the human situation, of course. We are far too
automatic; indeed, we are automatons. ...

We are "asleep," compared with what we could he. We are dreaming. We are
entranced. We are automatized. We are caught in illusions while thinking we
are perceiving reality. The woman who spoke after the Dalai Lama's talk was
asleep, dreaming, entranced, unaware that parts of her self contradicted
and sabotaged other parts. Her condition is our condition. We need to
awaken to reality, the reality of the problems caused by our fragmented
gives, so we can discover our deeper selves and the reality of our world,
undistorted by our entranced condition.
