---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXIII
    Page: 55
Title: How God will answer and purvey for them in spirit, that for business
  about His love list not answer nor purvey for themselves
---
And truly an we will lustily conform our love and our living, inasmuch as
in us is, by grace and by counsel, unto the love and the living of Mary, no
doubt but He shall answer on the same manner now for us ghostly each day,
privily in the hearts of all those that either say or think against us. I
say not but that evermore some men shall say or think somewhat against us,
the whiles we live in the travail of this life, as they did against Mary. But
I say, an we will give no more heed to their saying nor to their thinking, nor
no more cease of our ghostly privy work for their words and their thoughts,
than she did -- I say, then, that our Lord shall answer them in spirit, if
it shall be well with them that so say and so think, that they shall within
few days have shame of their words and their thoughts.

And as He will answer for us thus in spirit, so will He stir other men in
spirit to give us our needful things that belong to this life, as meat and
clothes with all these other; if He see that we will not leave the work of His
love for business about them. And this I say in confusion of their error, that
say that it is not lawful for men to set them to serve God in contemplative
life, but if they be secure before of their bodily necessaries. For they say,
that God sendeth the cow, but not by the horn. And truly they say wrong of
God, as they well know. For trust steadfastly, thou whatsoever that thou be,
that truly turnest thee from the world unto God, that one of these two God
shall send thee, without business of thyself： and that is either abundance
of necessaries, or strength in body and patience in spirit to bear need. What
then recketh it, which man have? for all come to one in very contemplatives.
And whoso is in doubt of this, either the devil is in his breast and reeveth
him of belief, or else he is not yet truly turned to God as he should be;
make he it never so quaint, nor never so holy reasons shew there again,
whatnot ever that he be.

And therefore thou, that settest thee to be contemplative as Mary was, choose
thee rather to be meeked under the wonderful height and the worthiness of
God, the which is perfect, than under thine own wretchedness, the which is
imperfect： that is to say, look that thy special beholding be more to the
worthiness of God than to thy wretchedness. For to them that be perfectly
meeked, no thing shall defail; neither bodily thing, nor ghostly. For
why? They have God, in whom is all plenty; and whoso hath Him -- yea, as
this book telleth -- him needeth nought else in this life.
