---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "11 - ䷊ - T'ai"
    Line: 6
    Page: 84-85
By: Arthur Rimbaud
Format: verse
---
Parked among benches of oak, in the nooks of the church
Which their breath foully cools, their eyes’ red rims
Toward the gilt-streaming choir and precentor’s perch
Where twenty mouths are bawling the pious hymns,
Inhaling the odor of wax like a perfume of bread,
Happy, like beaten dogs humiliated,
The Poor to their patron and sire, the good God,
Tender their laughable and stubborn “oremus.”

For the women, it’s really fine to smoothe these seats
After six black days of suffering imposed from on high.
They cradle here, within their strange capes’ pleats,
Caricatures of children, weeping fit to die.

Their unwashed breasts exposed, these topers of soup,
A prayer in their eyes, yet never saying a prayer,
Observe parading shabbily a group
Of little street -- girls with hats the worse for wear.

Outside, cold, hunger, man the drunken lout.
So it goes! An hour more. Later, nameless ills.
-- Meanwhile, there’s a whining, shuffling, all about,
From a bandage-swathed collection of old Jills.
The dazed are there, and the epileptics, those
From whom we turned aside in the squares yesterday,
And, muzzling ancient missals with the nose,
Those blind folk that a dog guides to an areaway.
All, slobbering faith both beggarly and insane,
Make their complaint to Jesus, infinitely,
Who dreams on high, yellowed by the livid pane,
Far from the scare-crows, the fat bad humanity,

Far from the stench of meat and fusty clothes,
A prostrate farce, sombre with noisome doings;
And prayer, with choice phrases, like a flower, grows,
And mysticisms take on the tone of suings,

When, from naves where dies the sun, in folds of silk,
Banal, with green smiles, Ladies, ah, the Daughters
Of Fashion, -- O Jesus! -- see them, they come, the bilious --
Their long yellow fingers kissing the holy waters.
