---
Tags:
  - Trials=Liberation
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 373-375
  Source:
    Title: The Spiritual Crisis of Man
By: Paul Brunton
---
The hour is here for us to associate ourselves consciously with the two
laws of compensation and evolution. We may base our general policy of
living on selfish interest, on upsurges of emotion, on calculating cunning
or on idle drifting with the tide of circumstances. In consequence, we
may find momentary benefits but we shall not find permanent ones. Or we
may base it on philosophy. If we do so, we desert the old game in trial,
error and suffering and begin to live by understanding. In that case, it
is not the unexpected but the expected which will happen to us. Ifa man
can look impersonally at his own present life and analytically at his own
past history, comprehension will begin to be born and later, out of that,
mastery. He to whom the pursuit of moral excellence and practical wisdom is
something more than a phrase, will find both in the fortunes and misfortunes
of existence help to achieve his aims. He will see the mistakes he has made,
what psychological causes led tip to them and what external consequences they
themselves led to; and seeing, he will suffer. If this suffering engraves a
new and higher attitude upon his mind, it will not be regarded as something
to be avoided but rather as something to be accepted. If, perceiving this,
he co-operates consciously and deliberately in the gestation process,
he will triumph over it. Out of the suffering, thus properly regarded,
he will draw a heightened power to control his lower selfand a heightened
capacity to understand it. Every fresh experience will then become like
oil to the flame of his growing understanding.

This result is arrived at only because he changes his attitude to that of
an eager learner and rejects the egotist interpretation of life for the
impersonal one. To others, suffering merely brings dulled consciousness
but to such a man it brings a cycle of new growth. Whatever seVere anguish
enters his life for the first time or the fourth time, be it the unheralded
turn of fortune for the worse or the unanticipated anxiety of surprising
events, be it the wrongdoing ofa human being or the tragic news ofa written
letter, be it a painful illness or a tremendous failure, he instinctively
asks himself such questions as： “Why has this come to me?” or “Why
has this person entered my life?” and then reflects impartially, coolly
and slowly, until he can discover its physical or inward significance. For
life would not have brought it into his experience if it were not his
due, which means if he had not earned it or needed it. Such philosophical
analysis often shows him that causes within himselfare responsible for
many external happenings. Awakened by suffering to remove defects or to
cultivate needed qualities and thus improve himself, he transmutes it
into an asset. Every defect in character or deficiency in judgment is
seen to lead in the end to a deficit in happiness. The problem of making
right choices or wise decisions is no easy one.

Men can help change the course of their destiny by changing the shape of
their character, intelligence and talent, or the form, energy, health and
condition of their body. If they inertly accept themselves as they are,
they must also accept the fulfillment of their destiny. When the law of
recompense lays out this destiny with hard living conditions or unwanted
misfortune, they are dissatisfied with its harshness. If, instead, while
trying to relieve the conditions or remove the misfortunes they gracefully
accepted the law as a just one, they would demonstrate wisdom and shorten
the period of suffering.

Where a sufferer finds that he cannot mend a bad environment or cannot
undo a tangle of bad karma, then he should mend the way in which he
views them. Where he cannot quickly adjust his outer circumstances, he
can and must adjust his inner self. When he cannot extricate himself from
a disharmonious environment by the integral use of intense endeavor and
inspired imagination, he must learn to look on it with new eyes. It is
the use that he makes of his sufferings that determines their values for
him. With the recognition that his faults punish him and his weaknesses
betray him, with a wise and impersonal attitude toward his troubles
-- whatever his personal feelings may be -- he can turn them into
assets. But if he lets those feelings sweep him away into bitterness,
hatred, resentment, malice, fear or selfishness, they will remain as
debits. It is not only unscrupulous conduct and injury of others that
brings eventual retribution. Bitter thoughts and resentful feelings,
negative ideas and unbalanced emotions will affect not only the quality of
a man’s character but, if strong and prolonged enough, also the quality
of his fortunes. Troubles may come to him which would not otherwise have
come to him. Enmities may be created or kept alive which would not have
touched him or, touching, would have died down. If his experience oflife
has soured him, he may be sure that his thinking about life has something
to do with the unhappy result.

When the mind’s negatives reach a certain degree of strength, a certain
depth of intensity, or when their repetition extends over a sufficient
period of time, a physical manifestation may eventually follow. A man’s
actions are largely predetermined and his fortunes largely predestined
by no other power or creature than himself. Both arise out of his own
nature. He may take a misfortune as a final defeat and sink by the
wayside of despair. Or he may take it as a first challenge and rise to
the summit of determination. In the end, it is his thought about it that
matters. His attitude toward these happenings is not less important than
the happenings themselves. The creative thought comes first; its visible
results will come later.
