---
Source:
  ID: b4e88958-dacd-4687-919f-5e468604946d
By: Sozan Genkyo
Title: Fox-Priest
Format: verse
Commentary:
  - Body: |
      An old man would alwyays come to hear Master Baizhan's
      dharma discourses.  One day he confessed to the master
      that when a studen asked him "Does an enlightened person
      fall into cause and effect?," he said "No, such a person
      does not." Because of this he became a wild fox for five
      hundred lifetimes. He then asked, "Please say a turning
      word for me. Free me of this wild fox body."

      Baichang said, "Don't ignore cause and effect."

      Freed from his fox body, the old man asked Baizhang to
      bury the fox body as he would a deceased monastic.
  - Body: |
      Sozan picks up the Loan at the time of the “fox priest"
      funeral. His unusually full composition has a central focus
      on the Baizhang, while his followers stand in smaller size
      behind him, The curving vertical lines that define their
      robes, and the white space within them, stand out against
      the grey tones of the rocky enclosure. Holding his staff,
      the Zen master faces the fox, also primarily composed
      of white space, in preparation For the cremation. The
      calligraphy echoes the diagonal from master to fox, with
      the signature “Sozan" and seals completing the work.
    By: Stephen Addiss
  - Body: |
      In spite of Master Sozan’s calligraphy： “Not caused,
      not Free from cause, a pair of dice of the same color,"
      this koan is not about cause and effect, but rather about
      duality. If you say： "Falling into causation." you
      go straight to hell as quick as an arrow. If you say：
      “Not falling into causation,“ you are a fox through
      and through. How will you leap clear of Baizhang's
      trap. Only Huangbo was able to see through Baizhang's
      clumsy ghost story. If you fall into the words and ideas
      or try to imitate Baizhang or Huangbo, you too will
      be a fox spirit. Say a word that goes beyond dualistic
      discrimination and free yourself of the fox body,
    By: John Daido Loori
---
Not caused, not free from cause,
a pair of dice of the same color
