---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Disciplines and Spiritual Practice
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 161-166
  Source:
    Title: The Spiritual Crisis of Man
By: Paul Brunton
Title: The Adventure of Meditation
References:
  - ID: a5a0bef1-17b8-42cf-8758-d08b4cadaf8a
---
In this energetic era anyone who places a high or higher value on the
practice of relaxation and meditation is likely to be thought either a
fool or a fanatic. It is one of the chiefdelusions of modern men, caught in
urban maelstroms, that if they were to make these daily pauses in life,
they would lose something because of the time lost from their affairs. On
the contrary, if the pause is real and sincere, they would gain something in
the very sphere in which the supposed loss would occur. Simply to introduce
short intervals of the fullest relaxation in the daily regime of personal
activity is enough to yield markedly beneficial results. Under the pressures
of modern civilization they are a biological need. Any man will do more
and better work, will feel less fatigued and conserve more vitality if
he replenishes his forces by such rearrangement of his hours. Thus he
loses nothing in actuality by losing these few minutes from his labours
and pleasures. Thought and feeling should welcome these brief beautiful
deliverances from the burden of common existence. Yet the sad irony is
that so many people are too preoccupied with worries to spare time for
that which could help them better to bear their worries. It is to their
own loss that they have no desire to relax or to meditate. And could they
understand the deeper phases of spiritual life, they would understand that
the common notion that no activity of the body means nothing done or gained,
is falsified by the gratifying results of meditation. The less common
notion that no activity of the intellect means the same profitless result
is falsified by the unforgettable results of contemplation, Incidentally
these two are not the same but lower and higher stages of the same practice.

We may now see what profound wisdom hid behind the ancient religious
law givers’ injunction to keep a weekly sabbatical day of rest. These
wise men of antiquity considered ways and means of reminding man of his
true purpose on earth. He was apt to become wholly entangled in earthly
desires and physical matters, and to forget what should be his supreme
desire-the discovery of, and communion with, his divine soul. This is why
they instructed him to substitute spiritual affairs and transcendental
business for them, why they instituted a special day in the week for the
purpose. He was recalled every seventh day to the higher object of all this
work, the ultimate end for which it was only a temporary means. He was to
be serious and even grave, to put frivolity aside for this one day because
death was an everpresent shadow. A day ofrest let his depleted surface
consciousness lie fallow only to be all the more fruitful later; it gave
the deeper levels of mind a chance to present these intuitive knowledge
and it turned thought towards the sacred ultimate purpose of all human life.

The same need or duty is even more urgent in this twentieth century
ofours. For modern invention, which could be used to bestow more leisure
for spiritual pursuits, is actually used to defeat this aim. With the
aid of automobiles, trains and even airplanes, and with the facilities
provided by amusement and sports places, the sabbath day is spent in
transient pleasures. Such a day should be marked by the rededication of
life to the loftiest accepted ideal and to the restatement of faith in
its essentially spiritual character. It is the proper time to consider the
future, to reflect upon the past and consequently to make advisable changes
in thought, plan and practice. It is the time for a man to reinspire
himself with basic attitudes. On that day he is to enter into prayer,
think about ultimates, reflect about aims, remember aspirations, read
inspired books and practice meditations. He is to re-estimate his worth
as bearing something divine in his heart. He is, finally, to consider and
become conscious of the relationship which exists between himself and God.

The flow of everyday living in work or leisure ordinarily distracts the mind
from its higher purpose and keeps it moving from subject to subject. This
continuous dissipation of the selfs psychical energies and vital forces
prevents any withdrawal of attention being concentrated in the endeavour
to come to itself. The attempt to save a certain number of minutes out
of the day‘s twenty-four hours for the sole purpose ofreversing the
How of attention, turning it from restlessness to repose and from the
senses to the soul, is the most important any man could engage in. He who
excuses himself on the grounds that he cannot find even this short period,
should ask his conscience whether all his ordinary activity in both work
and leisure is really as necessary as it seems. If his conscience affirms
that it is, ifhe can do no more, then it will be enough to maintain the
right attitude towards external affairs and to keep constantly in the
background ofhis mind the thought of the spiritual quest. Yet the truth
is that few are really in such an unfortunate situation.

No man may rightly say that he has had a full experience of life ifhe has
not had any spiritual experience during life. If he is to become better
balanced, Western man should not only give himself to active life but
also to contemplative life. Exercises in meditation should be given a
definite and assured place in Euro-American habits. Mystical practices
should no longer be confined to a few persons and therefore considered
to be abnormal, eccentric or queer. They should be brought into use by
a wider group. Whoever will devote a period of his day to them and will
support them by an honest effort to reform his way of life, may one day feel
within himself the presence of a purer individuality, a spiritual self. This
daily habit of excluding the personal affairs from attention or detaching
them from emotion, of holding the mind remote from the trivialities, the
temptations and the frictions of the world, while letting it sink deeper
into abstraction, leads it to get and enjoy a tranquillizing respite of
freedom from the pressure of lite, work and people.

The man who learns the art of retiring within himself to touch, not
the darker strata olithe ego‘s subconscious, but the deepest part
ofspiritual being, learns to possess both restfulness and happiness at his
command. To the extent that he digs more deeply into his mind, he there
finds benedictory powers of healing and pacifict'ttion. A prefatory of such
silent contemplation radiates its mood and spirit into the rest of his day.

The more interior degrees of, the mind's own being are the degrees nearest
to the Overself. It is because of this fact that the value of mystical
meditation is unique. For it draws the meditator’s consciousness more and
more inward, more and more to the divine state that is its kernel. So long
as the mind searches in regions alien to it, so long will the world’s
ultimate secret elude it. For the first step which the primordial cosmic
Mind took was outward into world manifestation and this points out the
inward direction in which our own last step must go： that is, within
the mind itself.

The human mind is everlastingly curious. It wants to know more and more. Yet
it can never finally slake this curiosity and satisfy this craving. All
that it gathers is finite and limited, incomplete and insufficient -- and
must remain so. When at last it wakes up to this fact, it will sooner or
later put itself upon the quest. Then, when it finally succeeds in turning
around and gazing within it will be stilled in, and become questionless
with, an infinite satisfaction.

We see things around us but not the light which renders the act ot‘seeing
possible. We experience the movement of thoughts but not that which renders
this movement possible. For just as we must presuppose the existence of
light in order to see a thing, so we must presuppose the existence of
mind in order to know a thought. So long as the individual consciousness
is entirely wrapped up in gazing at this pictorial presentation which
it calls the "world," so long will it be unconscious ofits own being,
so long will it remain an undisclosed mystery to itself. We do not know
that the same thoughts which make up the world ofour transient experience,
at the same time keep us from the world of eternal reality. This is why the
need of mystic withdrawal from them is a paramount. The aim ofmeditation,
when culminating in contemplation, is the stilling of all mental activity
so that Mind itself, the source and condition of this activity, may be
known in its original state. The practice ultimately leads the artist to
find beauty and the mystic to find the godlike within himself： This is
its highest purpose. Thus it leads them from materialism to mentalism,
which teaches the truth about “matter” and unveils the reality behind
its manifold appearances.

There is a Mind in man, immeasurably superior to his ordinary mind. If,
in quiet moments and still moods, he will patiently wait its promptings
and submit to them, if in these utterly relaxed reveries he will wait
watchfully yet positively until the Overself reveals its presence to him,
he may gain understanding, power and guidance immeasurably superior to
what he ordi» narily knows.

Strength runs wild without wisdom and calmness to direct it; the
complementary truth is that knowledge is dumb unless it is put into
action. The squatting figure of the yogi seated in tranquil meditation
and resting under cooling palm-fronds, silent and motionless as a stone
is fascinating to some harassed Westerners. He is a reflective witness and
not an active player in the game oflife‘, his eyes are set, half-closed
in a still glance, and his mind is held fast in a world where there are
not troublesome questions and no worrying problems. But can the yogi bring
this same detachment into the same busy turbulent kind oflite which the
average Westerner must live?

That man comes nearer to sanity and a full balanced life who begins or
punctuates or ends his day by sitting erect with folded palm or hands upon
his knees, with quiet ordered breathing and with eyes half-open or closed,
and who fixes his thoughts for as long as he can spare upon the Mind which
is at once the sublime source and mysterious sustainer of his being; and
who then deliberately draws moral strength and far-seeing vision from his
moments of meditation in order to go about his daily business, be it in
office or factory, law court or hospital, farm or ship, and if he seeks to
do his work with efficient keenness and effective practicality, both he and
the world will be gainers. He will have sufficient philosophic detachment to
discern in the very midst ofhis external activities and earthly ambitions
that they are as transient as foam. He will try to do his duty amid the
world's bustle, and to do it well, but he will not neglect the higher
duty which he learns from the stillness mystically hiding behind that
bustle. He will discipline himselfdaily but the source of such discipline
being the Overself it will more and more arise spontaneously and without
effort or seeking. By this regime it will eventually be possible for him
to reach a state wherein the hurts and harms ofeveryday life possess but
little power to wound. Even mistakes will be immediately converted into
opportunities for growth.

Civilization will justify itselfonly when men of the world become mystics,
and when at the same time mystics rediscover the world. In the kind of
period in which we live today, dominated as it is by economics and politics
by materialism and by violence, mysticism is inevitably separated from
worldly life. The quieter minds react from its noisiness by withdrawal from
the cities. The gentler spirits react from its violence by withdrawal into
solitude. The intuitional minds react from its materialism by withdrawal
into study and contemplation. Mysticism can find no standing ground
for itself and allies itself with escapism. But although driven now to
do this in self-defence, it will eventually be driven to reverse this
process, following certain events. When the climax of violence passes,
when materialism sinks exhausted, mysticism will have to return to active
service and its leaders will begin to feel the urge and guidance to
work in the outer world. Then they will find a place for themselves in
a society which, in its old dispensation, had little use for them. Then
public life will be inspired by its revelations.

When a fine Spanish contemplative, St. Theresa, finally penetrated the
enchanting glamour of her own mystical experience, she remarked： “This
is the end of that spiritual union, that there may be born of its working,
works.” What she found in the course of her own development foreshadowed
what will be found eventually in our own century by intelligent mystics,
as contrasted with self-centred neurotic ones. They will have to form
precise and clear ideas as to the practical implications and social values
ofmysticism during a time of world upheaval.

The hour will indeed come for the extroverted man to get a fresh
understanding of himself and at the same time to bring inner peace to his
disrupted nerves. He has been questioning the whole universe for centuries,
it is inevitable that he should also begin to question himself.

It is hard to say, precisely and accurately, how anyone begins to know that
this sublime power, the ()verself, exists within him： the revelation is
a compounded one. It consists of a metaphysical certitude, an intuitive
feeling, and a mystical experience -- all pointing to an indescribable
something which alone, of all things, exists by its own independent right;
which has as its very nature, causeless, eternal and perfect being.

Take Jesus' statement that “The kingdom of heaven is within you." The
meaning of his beautiful words is transparent. He who looks for something
ecclesiastical behind them is wasting time. They plainly bid each man to
listen in silent reverie to the sublime intimations ofhis hidden being,
that is, to practise mental quiet and enter into contemplation. Once he
recognizes that the Divine Mind, wherever else it may also be in this
infinite universe, is certainly within himselftoo, he ceases to wander in
darkness and starts walking in light. God is then no longer an alien and
remote Being to be propitiated in abject fear or flattered in wheedling
mendicancy but a sublime ever-presence to be sought in his own heart --
and to be sought nobly in joy, reverence, humility and love. In the end,
religious teachings about the soul must not only be founded on authentic
personal experience of the leaders but must also lead to personal experience
of the followers, or they will prove insufficient.

The soul, this mysterious entity who is wholly non-existent to many
people and whose quest is a chimera to most people, will eventually prove
to be the only one who remains when all others pass away. If a man’s
thought is always directed towards the objects of his experience and never
diverted towards the consciousness which makes that experience possible,
then it is inevitable that those objects shall assume a significance and
reality in and for themselves alone. That is to say, he will become a
materialist. Yet the Overself is that out of which his own consciousness
has come. Ought he not to give himself the daily spiritual chance to come
in contact with it, with his most intimate self?

He may travel the entire length and breadth of the five continents to
commune with their cleverest scientists, but if he does not also travel
within and commune with his own divine self, then the secret oflife
will still elude him. He misses what is most important if he misses
going into the invisible temple of his own heart. There the soul abides,
there the ray of God strikes the individual and there alone the satisfying
discovery of what he really is may be made. This is the fundamental task --
to become aware of the divine that is in him. All others are secondary and
tertiary. He must establish himself in the consciousness of the Overself
by and for himself. No other man can do it for him. And the Quest’s
labour in purification and meditation is indispensable for this purpose.
