---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 21 - ䷔ - Shih Ho
    Line: 1
    Page: 140-141
By: Henrik Ibsen
---
BURGOMASTER. All I can see is that you are again seeking an outlet for
your pugnacity. You want to make an onslaught on your superiors -- that
is an old habit of yours. You cannot endure any authority over you; you
look askance at anyone who holds a higher post than your own; you regard
him as a personal enemy -- and then you care nothing what kind of weapon
you use against him. But now I have shown you how much is at stake for
the town, and consequently for me too. And therefore I warn you, Thomas,
that I am inexorable in the demand I am about to make to you!

DR. STOCKMANN. What demand?

BURGOMASTER. As you have not had the sense to refrain from chattering
to outsiders about this delicate business, which should have been kept
an official secret, of course it cannot now be hushed up. All sorts of
rumors will get abroad, and evil-disposed persons will invent all sorts
of additions to them. It will therefore be necessary for you publicly to
contradict these rumors.

STOCKMANN. I! How? I don’t understand.

BURGOMASTER. We expect that, after further investigation, you will come
to the conclusion that the affair is not nearly so serious or pressing
as you had at first imagined.

STOCKMANN. Aha! So you expect that?

BURGOMASTER. Furthermore, we expect you to express your confidence that
the Board of Directors will thoroughly and conscientiously carry out all
measures for the remedying of possible defects.

STOCKMANN. Yes, but that you’ll never be able to do, so long as you go
on tinkering and patching. I tell you that, Peter, and it’s my deepest,
sincerest conViction

BURGOMASTER. As an official, you have no right to hold any individual
conviction.

STOCKMANN (starting). No right to -- ?

BURGOMASTER. As an official, I say. In your private capacity, of course,
it is another matter. But as a subordinate official of the Baths, you have
no right to express any conviction at issue with that of your superiors.

STOCKMANN. This is too much! I, a doctor, a man of science, have no right
to -- ?

BURGOMASTER. The matter in question is not a purely scientific one;
it is a complex affair; it has both a technical and an economic side.

STOCKMANN. What the devil do I care what it is! I will be free to speak
my mind upon any subject under the sun!

BURGOMASTER. As you please -- so long as it does not concern the Baths. With
them we forbid you to meddle.

STOCKMANN (shouts). You forbid -- ! You! A set of

BURGOMASTER. I forbid it -- I your chief; and when I issue an order,
you have simply to obey.
