---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Looking for Meaning and the Way
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 22-23
  Source:
    Title: In My Own Way
By: Alan Watts
---
Life must be played by ear -- which is only to say that we must trust, not
symbolic rules and linear principles, but our brains or natures. Yet this
must bring one back to the faith that nature makes no mistake. In such a
universe a decision which results in one’s own death is not a mistake：
it is simply a way ofdying at the right moment.

But nothing can be right in a universe where nothing can be wrong, and
every perception is an awareness of contrast, of a right/wrong, is/isn’t,
bright/dark, hard/soft situation. If this is the very nature of awareness,
any and every circumstance, however fortunate, will have to be experienced as a
good/bad or plus/minus in order to be experienced at all. By such reflections I
think myself into silence and, by writing, help others similarly spellbound by
thoughts and words to come to silence -- which is the realization that a linear
code cannot justly represent a nonlinear world. But this intellectual silence
is not failure, defeat, or suicide. It is a return to that naked awareness,
that vision unclouded by commentary, which we enjoyed as babies in the days
when we saw no difference between knower and known, deed and happening.
This time, however, we are babies reborn -- babies who remember all the rules
and tricks ofhuman games and can therefore communicate with other people as
if we were normal adults. We can also feel, as a just‘born baby cannot,
compassion for their confusions.

Now, from the standpoint of the wise-baby, the confusions of the normal adult
world cannot be straightened out without becoming even more confused. There
is no solution except to regain the baby’s vision and so realize that the
confusions are not really serious, but only the games whereby adults pass the
time and pretend to be important. Seen thus, the world becomes immeasurably
rich in color and detail because we no longer ignore aspects oflife which
adults pass over and screen out in their haste after serious matters. As in
music, the point of life is its pattern at every stage of its development,
and in a world where there is neither self nor other, the only identity is
just This -- which is all, which is energy, which is God by no name.
