---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 12 - ䷋ - P'i
    Line: 6
    Page: 93-94
By: William Bolitho
---
But perhaps by accumulation of this steady, smooth massaging of the nerves,
perhaps because, as the dance goes on he comes to less sober tunes,
the saxophonist climbs imperceptibly to a new step, the sliding dance
becomes more jaunty. Then suddenly I hear the real note of the saxophone,
unforgettable, high, and clear, as if from a heart of brass, the new thing,
the thing we have come to hear. To me it has quite passed out of humanity,
this famous upper register, but it is still near enough for me to understand;
piercing, musical, the cry of a faun that is beautiful and hurt. The leader
tips his instrument into the air; he blows with all his force but his
cheeks remain pale. He is now at the height of his art. The voice of our
age has come through his lips through this marvelous instrument. He is a
priest possessed with a half-human god, endlessly sorrowful, yet utterly
sentimental. Incapable of regret, with no past, no memory, no future,
no hope. The sound pricks the dancers, parts their lips, puts spring into
their march. These unexpressive, unethical, unthinking men have discovered
their unethical, unsentimental reaction to our age.

This is the thing that makes the saxophone great and brings fortune and
ruin to its players. But it is a changeable instrument and can feign
many things. Then, in spite of its nature, the saxophone seems to brood
and almost regret the years that have brought it to favor, the war, the
peace, and this state to which Europe through its own fault has come;
and ghosts of broken promises and broken soldiers seem sadly to look over
the shoulders of the dancers.

Every beat of the impeccable rhythm is heavy with the tread of the armies
of Somme and Marne, and under it the heavy echo of the unarmed millions
of Russians marching to Tannenberg. Then the saxophone seems burdened
with an illusory despair; other days before Europe was ruined rise up
before this assembly of those who were not ruined.

But this mood is fancy and the saxophone will not allow it long. It
turns with a curve into “I Don’t Care," or “Let’s Pretend”;
not even regretting our regrets, absorbed in the present, that owes no
debts either to the irretrievable past or to the incomprehensible future,
it strikes up “Rambler Rose,” the latest fox-trot, the march past
of our age. That is more to our taste, we modern Europeans, that oppose
to the dangers with which we are beleaguered not fear, nor courage,
only impossibility; and who have substituted for human aspiration that
needs belief this innocence of the faun, behind the saxophone. So, for
the supreme expression of our hard, unreflective joys, we have chosen
this instrument. Our fathers left it uncomprehended; our children will
shiver at it, and discard it again. For the present it makes audible the
spirit of our age.
