---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 273-278
  Source:
    Title: Sexism and God-Talk
By: Rosemary Radford Ruether
Title: Woman/Body/Nature： The Icon of the Divine
---
Layer by layer we must strip off the false consciousness that alienates us
from our bodies, from our roots in the earth, sky, and water. Layer by layer
we expose the twisted consciousness that has distorted our relationships and
turned them to their opposite. But in so doing we discover that the Big Lie
has limited power. Earth is not mocked. She brings her judgment, and this
judgment can no longer be confined to the ghettos and the reservations of
the poor.

The stench of it, the floating poison, the underground rumblings begin
to reach out to the suburbs of affluence, signaling the beginning of
the end of a way of life, a question mark over a social system. But
also the possibility of asking the question, the question of new
relations： simpler, more harmonious, more just, more beautiful patterns
of life. Woman/body/nature, no longer as the icon of carnality, sin, and
death, but as the icon of the divine, the divine Shekinah, the Wisdom of God
manifest, alive in our midst as the true center that holds us all together.

The First Level： Control Over the Womb

The first subjugation of woman is the subjugation of her womb, the
subjugation of access to her body, so that she should not choose her own
beloved or explore the pleasures of her own body but that her body and its
fruits should belong first to her father, who would sell or trade her to
her husband. She must be delivered as undamaged goods, duly inspected,
any signs of previous use punished by death. Only the male to whom she
has been legally handed over may put his seed in her body, so that he
can be sure that the children that emerge from her body belong to him,
pass on his name, inherit property. Boy children are preferred. Too many
girl children bring shame, perhaps expulsion, for the errant mother.

Philosophers minimize her contribution to the acts of conception and
birth. Aristotle proclaims through two thousand years of teachers that
woman is a misbegotten male, that the male seed alone provides the form of
the child, the woman is only the passive receptacle for man's active power.

Moses teaches that the male is the original human model. The woman was
created second, out of man's rib, to be his helpmate. Man gives birth to
woman, she is his offspring and creature, formed from his side to serve
him in lowliness. In these ways the power of her motherhood is stolen
from her, and she is reduced to an instrument of his virility.

The Christian Church teaches that birth is shameful, that from the sexual
libido the corruption of the human race is passed on from generation
to generation. Only through the second birth of baptism, administered
by the male clergy, is the filth of mother's birth remedied and the
offspring of the woman's womb made fit to be a child of GOd. Woman is
taught that the worst of sins, the worst of crimes, is to deflect the
male seed from its intended course in her womb. This is more sinful than
rape, for the rape of a woman does not interfere with the purposes of the
seed, while contraception wastes the precious seed and defeats its high
purposes. Anatomy is destiny, the psychologists teach. Woman must subject
herself to necessity, for this is the divine will. She must obediently
accept the effects of these holy male acts upon her body, must not seek
to control their effects, must not become a conscious decision maker
about the destiny of her own body.

The Second Level： Exploited Labor

The control of woman's womb means the subjugation of her person. From
person she becomes property to be bought and sold, passed from father
to husband for the price of two good plow oxen. To violate her is to
offend the property rights of her husband. If she does not resist to the
death, she can be divorced, perhaps even killed by her outraged male
relatives. Girl children are expendable; perhaps they are exposed on
hillsides at birth or sold into slavery.

Her labor belongs to him. To labor from before dawn to after dusk in
his household is her purpose for existence. She has no need to read and
write, no need to learn, to travel, to dream. Her sphere is defined,
confined; she must not stray from it. Each generation of daughters must
have its wings clipped early to be fed back into the treadmill. For him
she sets her maidservants spinning and weaving before dawn. She considers
a field and buys it, plants it with her own hands, harvests it, tells
its produce. Her lamp does nm go out at night. Her labor frees him for
the momentous tasks of war and politics. He is known at the gates. She
is not be known in public. She is to remain invisible. When he returns
in the evening, his food shall be ready, his clothes in order, his couch
prepared, in this way her history is stolen from her. It is said that she
did nothing. It is his achievements that we read about in books; his laws,
his wars, his power, his mayhem. He is the achiever, carriedfled about on
the backs of the laborers. The laborers who carry him have done nothing;
they are invisible, silent. No scrolls testify to their experience. No
monuments mark the places of their sufferings and deaths. Their laboring
hands and backs hold him up to the light of history, and they sink down
into the dark earth again.

Woman, the nonachiever, becomes woman the nonworker, the ornament of
conspicuous consumption, the object of pride of ownership and economic
prowess. Her furs testify to her husband's success. She adorns his
household, displaying dainty feet that cannot walk, polished nails that
cannot work. The pinnacle of his success is to no longer need her work,
to possess her only as a toy and a plaything. Black women, brown women,
immigrant women toil silently in the background, supporting the display,
polishing the cage of the songbird. The wife herself must conceal the
signs of her own toil, ease the lines of suffering from her face, the
marks of labor from her hands, keep up appearances. Women are set at
enmity with each other while collaborating in his service.

Early in the morning the army of chars, waitresses, secretaries, nurses,
librarians, and teachers march from their houses. The morning chores
are rushed, the children pressed through breakfast and off to school so
that women can get to work at the same time as men whose women do these
chores for them. On the job the women service male work： clean the
offices, prepare the food, type the letters, answer the phones, research
the studies. Upon this pyramid of female labor the executive arises,
seemingly imbued with superhuman wisdom and magnified power drawn from
the combined force of a vast, invisible reservoir; he stands upon it
commanding, pronouncing, deciding . ...

At five o'clock the army of women scatter to markets, nurseries, and
kitchens to prepare the home, so that, when the men return, the children
are already fetched, the food bought and cooked, the house cleaned. The men
linger to consolidate the networks that advance them on the ladder. Women,
it is mid, just can't compete; they lack what it takes, the drive, the
ambition. ...

The Third Level： The Rape of the Earth and Its Peoples

The labor of dominated bodies, dominated peoples -- women, peasants,
workers -- mediate for those who rule the fruits of the earth. The toil of
laboring bodies provides the tools through which the earth is despoiled
and left desolate. Through the raped bodies the earth is raped. Those
who enjoy the goods distance themselves from the destruction. The gold
wrestled from the mines of Mexico and Peru is carried across the oceans in
Spanish galleons, stolen by fast ships of Dutch and English merchants,
and ends up in banks in Amsterdam and London. The Indians who mined
it die of starvation. The pineapple and banana plantations ship their
succulent fruits to adorn the tables of Yankees whose own soil is stony,
whose climate is cold and damp. But those who are blessed with warm suns
and rich soil cannot afford to taste their own fruits. The strip mines
of Appalachia do not despoil the golf courses and parks of the mine
owners. No, they despoil the rocky hillsides of the dirt farmers. The
detergents flow through the streams where Indians live. The fish upon
whom the Indian depends for food floats belly up in the soapy water.

It is said that these people are lazy, backward, that they are poor
because they have few resources and no energy.., that we have gained
a head start because of our hard work. If we help them, maybe they can
catch up. So we ship down armies of technologists and allow the poor to
mortgage their furore on loans for development.

The development displaces the poor from the countryside and gives the
land to the plantation owners. The industries of the nation are bought
by the multinationals. The peasants who come to the city for work shine
shoes and sell chewing gum. They multiply like festering sores around the
glittering steel and glass monuments to development. The mood grows ugly. We
send their governments population-control experts and counterinsurgency
police. We finance the hardware of repression, and we call it the Alliance
for Progress. Armies of teenage girls in border towns assemble electronic
systems by day for a few dollars, return home at night to cook beans in
shanty kitchens. The electronic assemblies are shipped back across the
border to add to the fame and fortune of Yankee ingenuity.

On the backs, through the hands of vast toiling masses in Asia, Africa,
Latin America, the affluent colonizers arise, congratulate themselves
on their progress, and wonder at the poverty and ingratitude of those
whose bananas, gold, oil they have consumed. A bomb crashes through the
plate-glass window, blowing a hole in the dream of progress.

The Fourth Level： The Big Lie

Those who rule pay their professors to proliferate lies, to generate a
mental universe that turns everything upside down. The Big Lie makes those
who toil appear to be idle, while those who speak into dictaphones appear
to be the hard workers. It makes women appear the offspring of males, and
males the primary creators of babies. It makes matter the final devolution
of the mind, and mind the original source of all being. It regards the
body as an alien tomb of the soul, and the soul as growing stronger the
more it weakens the body. It abstracts the human from the earth and God
from the cosmos, and says that that which is abstracted is the original,
and the first, and can exist alone and independent.

The Big Lie tells us that we are strangers and sojourners on this
planet, that our flesh, our blood, our instincts for survival are our
enemies. Originally we lived as disincarnate orbs of light in the heavenly
heights. We have fallen to this earth and into this clay through accident
or sin. We must spend our lives suppressing our hungers and thirsts and
shunning our fellow beings, so that we can dematerialize and fly away
again to our stars.

It is said that mothers particularly are the enemy, responsible for our
mortal flesh. To become eternal and everlasting we must flee the body,
the woman, and the world. She is the icon of the corruptible nature,
seduced by the serpent in the beginning. Through her, death entered the
world. Even now she collaborates with devils to hold men in fast fetters
to the ground. A million women twisted on the rack, smoldered in burning
fagots to pay homage to this Lie.

It is said that enlightened man must drive the devils and witches from
the world, restore order, put himself in charge, reduce nature to his
control. With numbers and formulas he can search out her innermost secrets,
learn all the laws of her ways, become her lord and master. The cosmos
is reduced to elements, molecules, atoms, positive and negative charges,
infinitely manipulatable, having no nature of her own, given to him to
do with what he will. He will mount upon her with wings, fly away to the
moon, blow her up in the flash of atomic energy, live forever in a space
capsule, entombed in plastic, dining on chemicals.

The Collapse of the House of Cards： The Disclosure of Divine Wisdom

The facade starts to crumble. We discover buried histories. "We Shall
Overcome." "Sisterhood Is Powerful." "Viva la Huelga." "Bury My Heart at
Wounded Knee." We begin to understand the hidden costs. "Hello, carbon
dioxide; the air, the air is everywhere." Carcinogens in our health food,
strontium 90 in mother's milk. Atomic fallout in our swimming pool. Threats
to generations yet unborn. We are held hostage by the colonized, blackmailed
by the poor rich in raw materials. The Petroleum Age starts to run out
of gas.

Through the fissures of the system we glimpse the forgotten world of our
homeland. We learn to walk again; to watch sunsets; to examine leaves;
to plant seeds in soil. Turn off the TV; talk to each other to ease the
frenetic pace; get in touch with our circulatory system, with the rhythms
of our menstrual cycle that link us to the pull of the moon and tides of
the sea.

The scales begin to fall from our eyes, and all around us we see
miracles. Babies grow in wombs without help from computers. The sun
rises every day. Con Ed sends no bill for sunshine. The harmony is still
there, persisting, supporting, forgiving, preserving us in spite of
ourselves. Divine Grace keeps faith with us when we have broken faith
with her. Through the years of alien madness, she did not abandon us;
she kept the planets turning, the seasons recurring, even struggled to
put the upside down rightside up, to cleanse the channels of the garbage,
to blow the smog out to sea.

To return Home： to learn the harmony, the peace, the justice of body,
bodies in right relation to each other. The whence we have come and whither
we go, not from alien skies but here, in the community of earth. Holy One,
Thy Kingdom come, Thy will done on earth. All shall sit under their own
vines and fig trees and none shall be afraid. The lion will lay down with
the lamb and the little child will lead them. A new thing is revealed;
the woman will encompass the warrior. Thou shalt not hurt, thou shalt
not kill in all my holy mountain.

The Shalom of the Holy; the disclosure of the gracious Shekinah; Divine
Wisdom; the empowering Matrix; She, in whom we live and move and have
our being -- She comes; She is here.
