---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Consciousness, Transcendence
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 185-186
  Source:
    Title: On God
By: J. Krishnamurti
---
We always look from outside within; from knowledge we proceed to further
knowledge, always adding and the very taking away is another addition. And
our consciousness is made up of a thousand remembrances and recognitions,
conscious of the trembling leaf, of the flower, of that man passing by,
that child running across the field; conscious of the rock, the stream,
the bright red flower, and the bad smell of a pigsty. From this remembering
and recognizing, from the outward responses, we try to become conscious
of the inner recesses, of the deeper motives and urges; we probe deeper and
deeper into the vast depths of the mind. This whole process of challenges
and responses, of the movement ofexperiencing and recognizing the hidden
and the open activities, this whole is consciousness bound to time.

The cup is not only the shape, the colour, the design but also that
emptiness inside the cup. The cup is the emptiness held within a
form; without that emptiness there would be no cup nor form. We know
consciousness by outer signs, by its limitations of height and depth,
of thought and feeling. But all this is the outer form of consciousness;
from the outer we try to find the inner. Is this possible? Theories and
speculations are not significant; they actually prevent all disc0very. From
the outer we try to find the inner, from the known we probe hoping to
find the unknown. Is it possible to probe from the inner to the outer.“
The instrument that probes from the outer we know, but is there such an
instrument that probes from the unknown to the known? Is there? And how
can there be? There cannot be If there is one, it’s recognizable and
ifit’s recognizable, its within the area of the known.

That strange benediction comes when it will, but with each visitation,
deep within, there is a transformation; it is never the same.
