---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 20 - ䷓ - Kuan
    Line: 4
    Page: 134-135
Title: Story of Seyyid Said
---
One day ... Mohammed-bin-Nasir set sail for Zanzibar to pay his respects to
the Seyyid. He landed first at Mombasa, where he visited the Masrui. They
were holding a durbar： all the leading members of the clan were there,
grouped round the last deposed governor. When Mohammed entered, the Liwali
rose and bowed to him with marked respect, then he sat down again, resting
his chin on the hilt of his sword. After a time he raised his head with a
deep sigh, and all the Masrui, as if at a signal, drummed on their swords
with their fingers. Mohammed drew his own conclusions but cautiously made no
comment. He continued his journey south, and a few days later was salaaming
before Seyyid Said.

“Did you stop at Mombasa?” asked the Seyyid.

“I did.”

“What is the news from there?”

“The news is that the Masrui have retaken the fort.”

"How," cried the Seyyid angrily, “you are lying, l have had no word
of this. Explain yourself.”

“When I passed through Mombasa,” said his guest, “the Masrui were
in the town and your soldiers were in the fort.”

“Then how can you say that the Masrui are in the fort when they are
only in the town? What sort of talk is this?”

Mohammed-bin-Nasir told the story of the durbar ... “The meaning is
this. When the Liwali rested his head on his sword and sighed, that sigh
came from the bitterness of his heart as he thought of the fort, full of
your soldiers： and of the Governor, who is your man. It was as though
he spoke to his brothers and said to them -- Alas our fort is lost to us.

“Then all the Masrui replied, tapping their fingers on their swords. We
will retake the fort with our swords. And such was the drumming and beating
of the swords, that it seemed to me as though they had beaten on the gates,
forced them open and captured the fort.

"Therefore I said to you, Bwana Mkubwa： that the Masrui have taken
the fort and driven your soldiers away.”

The Seyyid Said considered a while, and then he said： “Stay here,
you are not permitted to leave. I will send to Mombasa and see if what
you say is true. If you are lying to me, I will know that you need a
lesson in manners, and you shall then receive it. But if you are right,
I will know you for a wise man, and you shall be one of my Councillors.”

Three days later came the news of a successful Masrui rising and their
capture of Fort Jesus. The Said, even while preparing for an expedition
against Mombasa, did not forget Mohammed-bin-Nasir, but gave him honours
and money, and sent him on an important mission.
