---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Mary
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 232-233
  Source:
    Title: Mary, Archetype of the Church
    Source:
      Title: Womanguides
By: Otto Semmelroth
Title: Mary's Assumption - Archetype of the Redeemed Cosmos and Church
---
The material world’s completed redeemed state must also shine forth in
Mary as Archetype of the Church. The essential point of view by which Mary
is seen as the Type ofthe Church is as follows： Mary typifies the essence
of the Church, a community of men and the Mystical Body of Christ, in whom
the Divine Life of Christ dwells. This life is to be given to everyone
who has been incorporated into this Body as a living member. The Church
has performed her receptive co-redemption in Mary, her representative. It
is in Mary that the Church has fully received her Redemption. It follows,
therefore, that the body must be seen in its perfected redeemed

state in Mary. This does not mean that her body could have avoided passing
through the dark portal of death. Every human being assumes completely the
work of Redemption and its fruits of grace when, by dying, he gives his
whole existence back to God the Father. Mary fulfilled this subjective,
receptive and co-redeeming role of the Church when, by dying, she made
Christ’s redemptive death her own and subjectively co-enacted it.

Mary died too, as Archetype ofthe co-redemptive Church. The Church day
by day has to make Christ's death her own. It is she who constantly,
continually dies with Christ and therefore rises with Him to eternal
life. Mary is the perfect expression of the Church’s co-redemptive
work. Therefore it is most fitting that she should have died as did
her Redeemer, both by her constant moral affirmation and by a physical,
bodily death.

At the same time the redeemed state ofthe physical cosmos at the end of
time shines forth in her body. In her body she co-enacted subjectively
Christ’s death. In her, as Archetype, her body shows the Church’s
fully redeemed body. Her body lights the way for the body ofthe Church and
shows that the transfiguration dwells like a seed within her corporeality.
