---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 212-213
  Source:
    Title: Reflections on the Art of Living
By: Joseph Campbell
Format: mixed
---
People ask me, “What can we have for rituals?" Well, what do you want
to have a ritual for? You should have a ritual for your life. All a ritual
does is concentrate your mind on the implications of what you are doing. For
instance, the marriage ritual is a meditation on the step you are taking
in learning to become a member ofa duad, instead of one individual all
alone. The ritual enables you to make the transit.

  Ritual introduces you
  to the meaning ofwhats' going on.

  Saying grace before meals
  lets you know that you’re about to eat
  something that once was alive.

When eating a meal, realize what you are doing. Hunting peoples thank the
animal for having given itself. They feel real gratitude. The main rituals
of mature hunting tribes, like those of the Americas, were addressed to
the animal. On the Northwest Coast, the principle rites were when the
first wave of salmon came in, and they were intended to thank the salmon.

  The life ofthe animal that you've taken
  is given back when you recognize
  what you've done.

And so, sitting down to eat, realize what you are doing： you are eating
a life that has been given so that you might live.

  ... man, like no other animal, not only knows that he is killing
  when he kills but also knows that he too will die; and the length of
  his old age, furthermore, is -- like his infancy -- a lfietime in
  itself, as long as the entire span of many a beast.

When I was working on the Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna, I had a lot of
meals with the monks. Their grace before meals is the most beautiful
invocation. It goes like this： “Brahman is the cosmic, universal,
life consciousness energy of which we are all manifestations. Brahman
is the sacrifice. Brahman is the food that we are eating. Brahman is the
consumer ofthe sacrifice. Brahman is the ladle that carries the sacrifice
to the fire. Brahman is the process of the sacrifice. He who recognizes
that all things are Brahman is on the way to realizing Brahman in himself."

The meaning of this grace is that taking food into your system is
like putting a libation into a sacrificial fire： the fire of your
digestive apparatus consumes what you eat, so eating is the counterpart
of a sacrifice.

The communion ritual is an extension of this idea, a motif that came into
the world with the dawn of agriculture： “Ifthe seed does not die,
there is no plant.” It dies as seed and yields to the sprout. Now,
since we are composed of spirit and matter -- the two substances are
what live in us -- we need two types of food. The food that nourishes
our material part -- vegetables, animals, whatever it is we eat -- is
earthly food, but we must also have spiritual food, nourishment for our
spiritual part. And communion, the eating of Christ, is a symbolization
of the imbibing of that spiritual nourishment, a concretization of the
idea of meditation. But in order to eat anything, it has to be killed,
so again we have the notion of the sacrifice.

  You should be willing
  to be eaten also.
  You are food body.

Every ritual is of that order, properly putting your mind in touch with
what you really are doing. And so, we should realize that this event here
and now： our coming together to help each other in the realization is
a beautiful, beautiful ritual.

You can ritualize your entire life that way, and it’s extremely helpful
to do so. The whole thing of compassion comes in there. What helped me
was waking up and thinking of my penny catechism： “to know, to love,
to serve God." I don’t think of God as up there. I think of God as
right here in whatever I'm knowing and loving and serving, uTo be happy
with Him forever in heaven" means to recognize your own compassion, your
own participation in that creature or person you’re with. That seems
to be the goal of the journey.
