---
Tags:
  - The Quest=The Fire Beyond the Tomb - Contemplating God, Faith, and Truth
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 8-9
  Source:
    Title: Does God Exist?
By: Hans Kung
---
The history of religion has shown that God can be called “father” in a
great variety of religions. In Israel’s vicinity, the Greeks had learned
from Homer’s epics that Zeus, son of Chronos, was the father of the family
of gods; in stoic philosophy, the Deity was regarded in cosmological terms
as father of the reason-permeated cosmos and of human beings endowed with
reason, related to him and cared for by him.

But the very fact that God can be called “father” in the pagan religions
should make us cautious about using this title. And this particularly in an
age of women’s emancipation, which has, again, made us sharply aware of the
problems involved. There is no doubt that the conception of God as Father very
often had to serve as a religious justification ofa sociological paternalism
at the expense of women and especially as a means ofpermanently suppressing
the feminine element in the Church. For this father ideology is, again,
the basis of an exclusively male Son Christology, which in turn is misused-
as in one of the more recent Roman Catholic documents -- with the aid of
abstruse biblical arguments for continuing to refuse ordination to women.

In general, the gods in the history of religion appear as sexually
differentiated, although at the very beginning there might have been bisexual
or sexually neutral beings and, later, bisexual features continued to be
displayed. But is it not striking that in the matriarchal cultures, in place
of the Father God there is the "Great Mother," out of whose fertile womb all
things and beings emerged and into which they return? This throws a light on
the historical relativity ofa masculine deity. From a historical standpoint,
it is quite possible-even though now, as formerly, disputed among historians
-- that matriarchy is older than patriarchy. In that case, the cult of the
mother deity -- which exercised some influence, for instance, in Asia Minor
on the cult of Mary -- would also have preceded chronologically that of the
Father God.

In the Old Testament also, the designation of “lather” for God is
not determined solely by the uniqueness of Yahweh. It appears also to
be socio-logically conditioned, bearing the imprint of a male-oriented
society. But, however the historical questions may be decided, God is certainly
not simply male. Even in the Old Testament, with the prophets, God displays
also feminine, maternal features. And it is this very thing that must be
seen more clearly from the modern standpoint, for the sake of the urgently
needed revaluation of women in the churches; for Christianity-and even more,
the other world religions-is a man’s religion that, however, in practice is
largely sustained by women. Consequently one thing must never be forgotten：

The designation of "father" God is misunderstood if is taken as the opposite
of "mother" instead of symbolically (analogically). "Father" is a patriarchal
symbol -- but also with matriarchal traits -- for a trans-human, transsexual,
absolutely last/absolutely first reality.

God, then, is not masculine and must not be seen through the screen of the
masculine-paternal, as an all-too-masculine theology did. The feminine-maternal
element must also be recognized in him.
