---
By: Aldous Huxley
Description: A letter from Aldous Huxley to Thomas Merton in response
  to Merton's letter from November of 1958, which he wrote in response
  to Huxley's Saturday Evening Post article from October 1958.
References:
  - ID: df165eb0-7d3f-4239-ada7-94ca11df2004
  - By: Aldous Huxley
    Source:
      Locus:
        Date: October 1958
      Title: The Saturday Evening Post
    Title: Drugs that Shape Men's Minds
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Locus:
    Date: 10 January 1959
    Location: 3276 Deronda Drive, Los Angeles, California
    Page: 194-196
  Source:
    Title: Letters of Aldous Huxley
  Title: God in All Worlds
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Consciousness, Transcendence
---
Dear Father Merton,

Thank you for your letter. The problems you raise are interesting and
difficult, and their solution must be sought on the practical and factual
level. A great deal of work has now been done on mescaline and lysergic
acid, both by researchers and clinicians using the drugs therapeutically
in such conditions as alcoholism and assorted neuroses. (One group now
working on alcoholism in British Columbia, incidentally, is using lysergic
acid within a religious, specifically Catholic, frame of reference,
and achieving remarkable results, largely by getting patients to realize
that the universe is profoundly different from what, on their ordinary,
conditioned level of experience, it had seemed to be.) Statistically the
results of all this experimentation are roughly as follows. About seventy
percent of those who take the drug have a positive experience; the others
have a negative experience, which may be really infernal. (A great many
of the states experienced by the desert fathers were negative. See the
thousands of pictures of the Temptations of St. Anthony.) All agree that
the experience is profoundly significant. One finds again and again,
in the reports written by subjects after the event, the statement that
"this is the most wonderful experience I have ever had" and "I feel
that my life will never be quite the same again." Among the positive
experiences a certain proportion, on the first occasion oftaking the drug,
are purely aesthetic-- transfiguration of the outer world so that it is
seen as the young Wordsworth saw it and later described it in the "(
)de on the Intimations of Immortality in Childhood"： a universe of
inconceivable beauty in which all things are full oflife and charged with
an obscure but immensely important meaning. Those who are congenitally good
visualizers tend to see visions with the eyes closed, or even, projected
upon the screen of the external world, with the eyes open. The nature of
these visions is often paradisal and the descriptions of them remind one
irresistibly of the description of the New Jerusalem in the Apocalypse or
the Eden oszekiel, or the various paradises of other religions. Finally
there are those whose experience seems to be much more than aesthetic
and may be labeled as pre-mystical or even, I believe, mystical. In the
course of the last five years I have taken mescaline twice and lysergic
acid three or {our times. My first experience was mainly aesthetic. Later
experiences were of another nature and helped me to understand many oIthe
obscure utterances to be found in the writings of the mystics, Christian and
Oriental. An unspeakable sense of gratitude for the privilege of being born
into this universe. ("Gratitude is heaven itself," says Blake -- and I
know now exactly what he was talking about.) A transcendence of the ordinary
subject-object relationship. A transcendence of the fear of death. A sense
of solidarity with the world and its spiritual principle and the conviction
that, in spite of pain, evil and all the rest, everything is somehow all
right. (One understands such phrases as, "Yea, though He slay me, yet
will I trust in Him" and the great utterance, I can't quote it exactly,
of Julian of Norwich.) Finally, an understanding, not intellectual,
but in some sort total, an understanding with the entire organism, of the
affirmation that God is Love. The experiences are transient, of course;
but the memory of them, and the inchoate revivals of them which tend to
recur spontaneously or during meditation, continue to exercise a profound
effect upon one's mind. There seems to be no evidence in the published
literature that the drug is habit forming or that it creates a craving
for repetition. There is a feeling -- I speak from personal experience
and from word-of-mouth reports given me by others -- that the experience
is so transcendently important that it is in no circumstances a thing
to be entered upon light-heartedly or for cnioyment. (In some respects,
it is not enjoyable; for it entails a temporary death of the ego, a
going-beyond.) Those who desire to make use of this "gratuitous grace,n
to co-operate with it, tend to do so, not by repeating the experiment
at frequent intervals, but by trying to open themselves up, in a state
of alert passivity, to the transcendent "isness." to use Eckhart's
phrase, which they have known and, in some sort, been. Theoretically,
there exists a danger that suhiects would have a craving for constant
repetition of the chemically induced experience. In practice this craving
doesn't seem to manifest itself. A repetition every year' or every six
months, is felt, most often, to be the desirable regimen.

A friend of mine, saved from alcoholism, during the last fatal phases
of the disease, by a spontaneous theophany, which changed his life as
completely as St. Paul's was changed by his theophany on the road to
Damascus, has taken lysergic acid two or three times and affirms that his
experience under the drug is identical with the spontaneous experience
which changed his life -- the only difference being that the spontaneous
experience did not last so long as the chemically induced one. There is,
obviously, a field here for serious and reverent experimentation.

With all good wishes. I am

Yours very sincerely,

Aldous Huxley
