---
By: 6e692c9a-52ef-49c0-a8c5-4ab5e733a7cd
Format: Verse
Source:
  ID: 8147df67-439b-4909-bfe3-d55b944af666
  Locus:
    Daily: December 8-10
Title: Of Course Things Like That Can Happen
---
God once made love to a saint who had a hairy belly. Of course things
 like that can happen!
And it was a surprise, only to the novice on the path, when the
 saint's stomach began to swell just like a woman's.
Weeks went by, then months. The saint's cheeks blossomed into
 beautiful roses. He became like a young bride, pregnant with a holy
 child. His gratitude was speechless, and his eyes shone like two
 planets making love.
The town began to stand outside his house at night, for it had come to
 the attention of the faithful that as the moon passed by on its round,
 it would sometimes bend over and kiss his roof! Of course things like
 that can happen.
Life went on, amidst the ten thousand other wonders： Whiskers and
 weeds and trees and charming babies kept emerging.
People and cattle and bees worked side by side, all sweetly humming.
And come lunch, all dined on the same mysterious divine manna of
 nourishing Love -- disguised in a thousand shapes, colors and forms.
Galaxies gave away their ingenious ideas and told us of their private
 body functions. So man too, eats, burps and excretes more worlds.
How is it that invisible thoughts can lift heavy matter and build
 cities and armies and altars?
All contain a hidden strategy to be transformed again into the holy
 wonderment!

The sun rolls through the sky meadow every day and a billion cells run
 to the top of a leaf to scream and applaud and smash things in their
 joy.
Of course things like that can happen.
Rivers stay up all night and chant; luminous fish jump out of the
 water spitting emeralds at all talk of heaven being anywhere else,
 but -- Right Here!
Clouds pull each other's pants down and point and laugh. Oh my dear,
 of course things like that can happen. For all is written in the mind
 to help and instruct the dervish in dance, romance and prayer.
The stars get a little crazy and drunk at night and throw themselves
 across the sky.
Only an insane compound is not going mad with excitement at this
 extraordinary performance by God!
And still, light stretches its arms open even more and calls to you
 because you are creation's lover, to cease any unforgiving and just
 boogie -- O yeah! Look! Angels and flowers are playing hooky in
 graveyards, laughing and rolling naked on cool stones.
Why go to sleep tonight, exhausted from fear or want when the Old
 King, Himself, is still so jazzed up -- He is doing somersaults and
 handstands, and offering useful advanced lessons ... about stuff
 between the sky & earth's sheets.
Hell yes, O boy, O girl -- indeed things like that can happen.

A few days before the delivery of God's baby, the saint had to visit a
 city close by where few knew of him.
He was walking unnoticed past a mosque, and the shouts of God's
 admirers happened to fill the air, saying, "Allah, Allah! Where are
 You? Reveal Thyself, Beautiful, Precious One."
And the child in the womb of the Master could not remain silent, and
 sang back, in an astounding voice,
"I Am Here! I Am Here -- dear life!"
The crowd in the mosque became frantic, and they picked up shoes,
 clubs and stones. You know what then happened -- the story becomes
 grim. For most cannot bear the truth.
But the moon cannot hold a grudge. It still stops by some nights and
 leans over this holy earth and gives each object and creature ... a
 full, wet kiss.
For the moon knows that God is amorous deep down—He cannot stop making
 love.
From the Unseen and Immaculate we came for a visit to form. All of
 heaven, and every world, is but a footstool before our true and
 lasting throne.
O Hafiz, look at the splendor of God's kindness： The sun, His Self,
 has been planted in a thousand furrows across every soul's body.
Of course my sweet ones, everything God and I say, can happen.
