---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LXX
    Page: 113-114
Title: That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we begin more
  readily to come to knowing of ghostly things, so by the defailing of
  our ghostly wits we begin most readily to come to the knowledge of God,
  such as is possible by grace to be had here
---
And therefore travail fast in this nought, and this nowhere, and leave thine
outward bodily wits and all that they work in： for I tell thee truly,
that this work may not be conceived by them.

For by thine eyes thou mayest not conceive of anything, unless it be by the
length and the breadth, the smallness and the greatness, the roundness and
the squareness, the farness and the nearness, and the colour of it. And
by thine ears, nought but noise or some manner of sound. By thine nose,
nought but either stench or savour. And by thy taste, nought but either
sour or sweet, salt or fresh, bitter or liking. And by thy feeling, nought
but either hot or cold, hard or tender, soft or sharp. And truly, neither
hath God nor ghostly things none of these qualities nor quantities. And
therefore leave thine outward wits, and work not with them, neither within
nor without： for all those that set them to be ghostly workers within,
and ween that they should either hear, smell, or see, taste or feel, ghostly
things, either within them or without, surely they be deceived, and work
wrong against the course of nature.

For by nature they be ordained, that with them men should have knowing of all
outward bodily things, and on nowise by them come to the knowing of ghostly
things. I mean by their works. By their failings we may, as thus： when
we read or hear speak of some certain things, and thereto conceive that our
outward wits cannot tell us by no quality what those things be, then we may
be verily certified that those things be ghostly things, and not bodily things.

On this same manner ghostly it fareth within our ghostly wits, when we
travail about the knowing of God Himself. For have a man never so much
ghostly understanding in knowing of all made ghostly things, yet may he never
by the work of his understanding come to the knowing of an unmade ghostly
thing： the which is nought but God. But by the failing it may： for why,
that thing that it faileth in is nothing else but only God. And therefore
it was that Saint Denis said, the most goodly knowing of God is that, the
which is known by unknowing. And truly, whoso will look in Denis’ books,
he shall find that his words will clearly affirm all that I have said or
shall say, from the beginning of this treatise to the end. On otherwise than
thus, list me not cite him, nor none other doctor, for me at this time. For
sometime, men thought it meekness to say nought of their own heads, unless
they affirmed it by Scripture and doctors’ words： and now it is turned
into curiosity, and shewing of cunning. To thee it needeth not, and therefore
I do it not. For whoso hath ears, let him hear, and whoso is stirred for to
trow, let him trow： for else, shall they not.
