---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XIII
    Page: 43
Title: What meekness is in itself, and when it is perfect and when it
  is imperfect
---
Now let see first of the virtue of meekness; how that it is imperfect when
it is caused of any other thing mingled with God although He be the chief;
and how that it is perfect when it is caused of God by Himself. And first
it is to wit, what meekness is in itself, if this matter shall clearly be
seen and conceived; and thereafter may it more verily be conceived in truth
of spirit what is the cause thereof.

Meekness in itself is nought else, but a true knowing and feeling of a
man’s self as he is. For surely whoso might verily see and feel himself
as he is, he should verily be meek. Two things there be, the which be cause
of this meekness; the which be these. One is the filth, the wretchedness,
and the frailty of man, into the which he is fallen by sin; and the which
always him behoveth to feel in some part the whiles he liveth in this life,
be he never so holy. Another is the over-abundant love and the worthiness of
God in Himself; in beholding of the which all nature quaketh, all Insomuch,
that were it not that through the wisdom of His Godhead He measured their
beholding after their ableness in nature and in grace, I defail to say what
should befall them.

This second cause is perfect; for why, it shall last without end. And the
tother before is imperfect; for why, it shall not only fail at the end of
this life, but full oft it may befall that a soul in this deadly body for
abundance of grace in multiplying of his desire -- as oft and as long as God
vouchsafeth for to work it -- shall have suddenly and perfectly lost and
forgotten all witting and feeling of his being wretched. But whether this
fall oft or seldom to a soul that is thus disposed, I trow that it lasteth
but a full short while： and in this time it is perfectly meeked, for it
knoweth and feeleth no cause but the Chief. And ever when it knoweth and
feeleth the tother cause, communing therewith, although this be the chief：
yet it is imperfect meekness. Nevertheless yet it is good and notwithstanding
must be had; and God forbid that thou take it in any other manner than I say.
