---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Hidden Face of God=Loss, Loneliness, and Grief
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 364-366
  Source:
    Title: The Sign of Jonas
By: Thomas Merton
---
I climb the trembling, twisted stair into the belfry. The darkness stirs
with a flurry of wings high above me in the gloomy engineering that holds
the steeple together. Nearer at hand the old clock ticks in the tower. I
flash the light into the mystery which keeps it going, and gaze upon the
ancient bells.

I have seen the fuse box. I have looked in the corners where I think
there is some wiring. I am satisfied that there is no fire in this tower
which would flare like a great torch and take the whole abbey up with it
in twenty minutes. ...

And now my whole being breathes the wind which blows through the belfry,
and my hand is on the door through which I see the heavens. The door swings
out upon a vast sea of darkness and of prayer. Will it come like this,
the moment of my death? Will You open a door upon the great forest and
set my feet upon a ladder under the moon, and take me out among the stars?

The roof glistens under my feet, this long metal roof facing the forest and
the hills, where I stand higher than the treetops and walk upon shining air.

Mists of damp heat rise up out of the fields around the sleeping abbey. The
whole valley is flooded with moonlight and I can count the southern hills
beyond the water tank, and almost number the trees of the forest to the
north. Now the huge chorus of living beings rises up out of the world
beneath my feet： life singing in the watercourses, throbbing in the
creeks and the fields and the trees, choirs ofinillions and millions of
jumping and flying and creeping things. And far above me the cool sky
opens upon the frozen distance of the stars.

I lay the clock upon the belfry ledge and pray cross-legged with my back
against the tower, and face the same unanswered question.

Lord God of this great night： Do You see the woods? Do You hear the
rumor of their loneliness? Do You behold their secrecy? Do You remember
their solitudes? Do You see that my soul is beginning to dissolve like
wax within me?

Clamabo per diem et non exaudic’s, et node et non ad imipz'entiam mi/zi!

Do You remember the place by the stream? Do You remember the top ofthe
Vineyard Knob that time in autumn, when the train was in the valley? Do
You remember McGinty's hollow? Do You remember the thinly wooded hillside
behind Hanekamps place? Do You remember the time of the forest fire." Do
You know what has become of the little poplars we planted in the spring? Do
You observe the valley where l marked the trees?

There is no leaf that is not in Your care. There is no cry that was not
heard by You before it was uttered. There is no water in the shales that
was not hidden there by Your wisdom. There is no concealed spring that
was not concealed by You. There is no glen for a lone house that was not
planned by You for a lone house. There is no man for that acre of woods
that was not made by You for that acre of woods.

But there is greater comfort in the substance of silence than in the answer
to a question. Eternity is in the present. Eternity is in the palm ofthe
hand. Eternity is a seed of fire, whose sudden roots break barriers that
keep my heart from being an abyss.

The things ofTime are in connivance with eternity. The shadows serve
You. The beasts sing to You before they pass away. The solid hills
shall vanish like a worn-out garment. All things change, and die and
disappear. Questions arrive, assume their actuality, and also disappear. In
this hour I shall cease to ask them, and silence shall be my answer. The
world that Your love created, that the heat has distorted, and that my
mind is always misinterpreting, shall cease to interfere with our voices.

Minds which are separated pretend to blend in one another's language. The
marriage of souls in concepts is mostly an illusion. Thoughts which travel
outward bring back reports of You from outward things： but a dialogue
with You, uttered through the world, always ends by being a dialogue with
my own reflection in the stream of time. With You there is no dialogue
unless You ChOOSC a mountain and circle it with cloud and print Your words
in fire upon the mind of Moses. What was delivered to Moses on tables of
stone, as the fruit oflightning and thunder, is now more thoroughly born
in our own souls as quietly as the breath of our own being.

The hand lies open. The heart is dumb. The soul that held my substance
together, like a hard gem in the hollow of my own power, will one day
totally give in.

Although I see the stars, I no longer pretend to know them. Although I
have walked in those woods, how can I claim to love them? One by one I
shall forget the names ofindividual things.

You, Who sleep in my breast, are not met with words, but in the emergence of
life within life and of wisdom within wisdom. You are found in communion：
Thou in me and I in Thee and Thou in them and they in me： dispossession
within dispossession, dispassion within dispassion, emptiness within
emptiness, freedom within freedom. I am alone. Thou art alone. The Father
and I are One.
