---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 931-932
Tags:
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Universal Man
  - Union-Identity=Mysterium Magnum=Non-Duality
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=The Nature of Reality
  - Combat-Action=Work, Action and Society=Non-Acting Action
  - Discernment-Truth=The Void=The Plenitude of the Void
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Incorruptibility
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Ultimate Felicity
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Supernal Sun
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=The Spiritual Tincture
By: Sri Sankarâchârya
References:
  - Title: Chândogya Upanishad
    Locus: VI. i. 4-6
---
He (the Yogi delivered in this life, jivan-mukta) knows that all contingent
things are not different from Atmâ (in their principle), and that apart
from Atmâ there is nothing, ’things differing simply (in the words of
the Veda) in attribution, accident and name, just as earthen vessels receive
different names, although they are but different forms of earth'： and thus
he perceives that he himself is all things. ...

He is without (distinct) qualities and actionless： imperishable (akshara,
not subject to dissolution, which exercises dominion only over the multiple),
without volition (applied to a definite act or to determined circumstances)：
abounding in Bliss, immutable, without form： eternally free and pure. ...

He is incorruptible, imperishable： he is the same in all things, pure,
impassible, invariable. ...

He is Brahma, after the possession of which there remains nothing to possess：
after the enjoyment of whose Bliss there remains no felicity to be desired;
and after the attainment of the Knowledge of which there remains no knowledge
to be obtained. ...

He is Brahma, by which all things are illuminated, the Light of which causes
the sun and all luminous bodies to shine, but which is not made manifest
Itself by their light.

He himself pervades his own eternal essence (which is not different from
the Supreme Brahma), and (simultaneously) he contemplates the whole World
(manifested and unmanifested) as being (also) Brahma, just as fire intimately
pervades a white-hot iron ball, and (at the same time) also reveals itself
outwardly (by manifesting itself to the senses through its heat and its
luminosity).
