---
Tags:
  - Revelation=wakening the Great Mother
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 226-227
  Source:
    Title: Womanspirit Rising
    By:
      - Judith Plaskow
      - Carol P. Christ
By: Carol P. Christ
Title: Why Women Need the Goddess
---
If the simplest meaning of the Goddess symbol is an affirmation of the
legitimacy and beneficence of female power, then a question immediately
arises, “Is the Goddess simply female power writ large, and, if so,
why bother with the symbol of Goddess at all? Or does the symbol refer to
a Goddess ‘out there’ who is not reducible to a human potential?”
The many women who have rediscovered the power of Goddess would give
three answers to this question： (1) The Goddess is divine female, a
personification who can be invoked in prayer and ritual; (2) the Goddess
is symbol of the life, death, and rebirth energy in nature and culture,
in personal and communal life; and (3) the Goddess is symbol of the
affirmation of the legitimacy and beauty of female power (made possible
by the new becoming of women in the women's liberation movement). If one
were to ask these women which answer is the “correct” one, different
responses would be given. Some would assert that the Goddess definitely
is not “out there,” that the symbol ofa divinity “out there”
is part of the legacy of patriarchal oppression, which brings with it
the authoritarianism, hierarchicalism, and dogmatic rigidity associated
with bib lical monotheistic religions. They might assert that the Goddess
symbol reflects the sacred power within women and nature, suggesting the
connectedness between women’s cycles of menstruation, birth, and menopause,
and the life and death cycles ofthe universe. Others seem quite comfortable
with the notion of Goddess as a divine female protector and creator and
would find their experience of Goddess limited by the assertion that
she is not also out there as well as within themselves and in all natural
processes. When asked what the symbol of Goddess means, Starhawk, a feminist
priestess, replied, “It all depends on how I feel. When I feel weak,
She is someone who can help and protect me. When I feel strong, She is the
symbol of my own power. At other times I feel Her as the natural energy in
my body and the world." How are we to evaluate such a statement? Theologians
might call these the words of a sloppy thinker. But my deepest intuition
tells me they contain a wisdom that Western theological thought has lost.
