---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 246-247
  Source:
    Title: IV Ezra
    Locus: VII-IX passim
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Judgement=On Judging Others
  - 120
  - 300
  - 420
  - 493
  - 563
  - 261
  - 464
  - 602
  - 459
  - Union-Identity=Moving At Will-The Miracle Of Flight
  - 250
  - 618
---
O Lord my Lord, lo, thou hast ordained in thy Law that the righteous
shall inherit these things, but that the ungodly shall perish. The
righteous, therefore, can endure the narrow things because they hope
for the wide： those, however, who have done wickedly endure the narrow
things, but yet shall not see the wide. And he said unto me：

  Thou art not a judge above God
  Nor wise above the Most High.

Yea, rather, let the many that now are perish than that the law of God
which is set before them be despised! For God did surely command them
that came (into the world), when they came, what they should do to
live, and what they should observe to avoid punishment. Nevertheless
they were disobedient, and spake against him;

  They devised for themselves vain thoughts,
  they proposed to themselves wicked treacheries;
  They even affirmed the Most High exists not. ...
  In his statutes they have put no faith,
  and have set at naught his commandments：
  Therefore, O Ezra,
  For the empty, empty things,
  And for the full, full things! ...
  And I will not grieve over the multitude of them that perish： for they
  it is who now are made like vapour,
  counted as smoke,
  are comparable unto the flame：
  They are fired, burn hotly, are extinguished! ...

For how long a time hath the Most High been longsuffering with the
inhabitants of the world -- not for their sakes, indeed, but for the
sake of the times which he has ordained! ...

Just as the husbandman sows much seed upon the ground and plants a
multitude of plants, and yet not all which were sown shall be saved in
due season, nor shall all that were planted take root; so also they
that are sown in the world shall not all be saved. ...

  Nay, Lord God! but
  spare thy people,
  compassionate thine inheritance! ...

And he answered me and said： ... Thou comest far short of being able
to love my creation more than I! ... For the Most High willed not
that men should come to destruction; but they -- his creatures -- have
themselves defiled the Name of him that made them, and have proved
themselves ungrateful to him who prepared life for them. ...

  I considered my world, and lo! it was destroyed;
  and my earth, and lo! it was in peril --
  on account of the tumults of those who are (living) in it.

And I saw, and spared (some) with very great difficulty, and saved me
a grape out of a cluster, and a plant out of a great forest. Perish,
then, the multitude which has been born in vain; but let my grape be
preserved, and my plant, which with much labour I have perfected!
