---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=The Emerging Woman
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 284-285
  Source:
    Title: Feminist Theology and Spirituality
By: Rosemary Radford Ruether
Title: What Is Feminist Spirituality?
---
There are in the North American world at the present moment two primary
contenders for the definition of feminist spirituality. These two
contenders appear, from the perspective of this writer, to fall into two
different patterns, which might be characterized as the “aesthetic”
and the “ethical” understandings of feminist theology. The aesthetic
position assumes that there is a preexisting harmony between all parts of
reality. Yin and yang, male and female, spirit and flesh, humans and nature,
nature and the divine, all are parts ofone primal rhythm. The breaking of
this harmony into contraries is an illusion. Sin and evil do not really
exist. It is a lie foisted upon us by antinatural civilization. One has
only to escape from civilization back to nature to reembrace the primal
harmony. Rituals and chants disenchant the false world of contraries and
put us back in union with the primal harmony.

This primal harmony lies under the sign of the primacy of the mother. The
original deity of humanity was the Mother Goddess, representing this
primal rule of the mother. The advent of father rule broke the primal
harmony and subjugated the mother. Bliss and harmony will be restored by
escaping from father culture in all its forms, especially its religious
forms, and reembracing the religion of the Mother Goddess, either as
groups of women exclusively or as groups which include males, but only
those who accept the integration ofmaleness under mother rule.

This religion of primary harmony under the Mother Goddess is presumed to
reflect both the actual religion and the actual sociology of prepatriarchal
matriarchal cultures. They correspond to “original paganism” before
its distortion by patriarchy and suppression by Iudaism, Christianity,
and Islam. Feminist religion necessarily involves a root and branch
repudiation of biblical religion in favor ofgoddess religion.

The “ethical” or “liberation” perspective on feminist theology
also believes in original harmony as a symbol ofthe authentic ground
and potential of human life. But it takes more seriously the broken
relations between self and body, self and others, self and nature, self
and God, as creating not just false images, but also broken and distorted
existence. It sees this brokenness as generating a massive historical
counterreality, a system of evil relationships that divides all reality
from its authentic potential. This corruption does not leave either side
uncorrupted. One cannot imagine that maleness and fathering stand for
falsehood, but femaleness and motherhood stand for unbroken harmony;
that civilization stands for corruption, but uncultivated nature stands
for unbroken harmony; that reason is distorted, but spontaneous bodily
appetites connect us with harmony and goodness.

If patriarchal theology sacralized the lie of distorted relations by making
the male side of the dualism good and the female evil, goddess religion
is in danger of simply reversing the same dualisms. Liberation feminism
does not believe that one can banish the contradictions by cultural
methods of identifying with the maternal pole against the paternal pole
of the traditional dualism. Rather, it calls for an ethical struggle to
transform both the selfand the social system that supports exploitative
relations. Females as well as males, nature as well as civilization,
bodiliness as well as rationality, have been distorted by sinful
existence. Both sides need to be transformed into a new whole.

Liberation feminist spirituality finds this tradition of critical
judgment and transformation at the base of the Jewish and Christian
prophetic tradition. It cannot deny that it learned this pattern of
thought from biblical religion and that biblical religion taught this
tradition to modern liberation movements. Thus while it repudiates the
patriarchy of biblical religion, it nevertheless claims this underlying
prophetic base of biblical religion. Feminist theology should not fall
back on biblical exclusivism over against “paganism.” It should not
call for biblical religion as the “true” foundation of feminism over
against non-Christian traditions. Rather it should raise questions about
all religious exclusivism, including the reversed use ofexclusivism by
goddess religion to repudiate biblical religion.

Many of the theses of goddess religion are problematic. It is not clear that
female symbols of God point to original matriarchy. Moreover, it does not
appear that the joint worship of gods and goddesses in ancient cultures
represented the dualisms of the feminine against the masculine, nature
against civilization. These are modern dualisms generated by post-Christian
culture out of and against inherited Christian patterns. Indeed what may
be a positive resource of ancient paganism is that both male and female
symbols ofthe divine represented divine sovereignty in a way that united
natural and social powers.

Feminist theology seeks to transcend the dichotomy of biblical exclusivism
or a reversed exclusivism that would call for the rejection of biblical
religion in favor ofa “goddess religion.” Instead, it should seek to
recapitulate the religious journey of the Near Eastern, Mediterranean,
and Western worlds in a way that could embrace both non-Christian and
Christian traditions, both suppressed and dominant traditions -- in Mary
Wakeman’s words, “By reaching back and encompassing, we point forward
to a new synthesis.”
