---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 209-210
  Source:
    Title: God in the Kingdom
By: Michael Murphy
Title: The Dance of Shiva
---
In South India, not far from Madras and Pondicherry, lies the Temple of
Chidambaram, known to many as the original home of Nataraian, the dancing
Shiva. The temple there is like a canyon-fort, with great walls enclosing
smaller temples of varying shapes and sizes, all of them passageways to
different parts of Shiva's body. One without windows is black as night and
houses the God's akashie, or etheric Lingam： in its dark recess Hindu
women cover the black and tapering stone with melted butter, stroking
it slowly until its shape is worn smooth. Another houses the great bell,
which is struck to announce disappearances and renewals of the God. Around
the compound there is a corridor with a thousand pillars, and near its
southern gate there stands the pavilion with the famous figure. When the
pavilion doors are open you can see the King of Dancers from any point --
dancing on a pyramid of gods and demons in a prefiguration of His dance
to bring the world down and end the cosmic cycle.

I visited the temple while I was at the Aurobindo ashram near the end
of my journey around the world, passing through the outer gates in the
wake of an American 521th with orange robes and a devastating smile who
said it had come to him in a dream that he should bring me here. The
moment I crossed the threshold I felt the presence of the God. Not the
excitement of anticipation merely or the strangeness of the place, but
the overwhelming presence of Shiva, as tangible as the drum rolls and
basso chanting one heard in the distance.

We walked in silence around the temple compound, past the candelit
cave which housed the Lingam (women chanting as they rubbed its sides,
being entered by its etheric substance for ether is the medium of sound,
and this is its Lingam), past the temple bell, and smaller passages that
showed you Shiva's many faces, down the thousand-pillared corridor to
the edge of a crowd pressing round the dancing figure. Its flying arms
and legs were perfect poise. It was glowing as iflit from within.

Ceremonies were beginning and the Brahmin priests of Tamilnad were seated
around the statue in ascending banks, chanting Sanskrit mantras with a
ringing power and hard, insistent beat -- a beat to open nerveways of
the densest mind, no one, no part to be left behind in this culminating
act of worship. Then the sliding doors slammed shut. The God had disappeared.

The crowd pressed closer, and for a moment I was lost in the wavering
space. Then the doors slid back. The God was covered high with flowers,
a mountain ofpetals and blossoms where the statue had been, and the
Sanskrit chant began to swell, hint of frenzy ordered by the mantra-beat,
every whiterobed figure bobbing now with growing passion.

They began to stroke the flowers away, to unveil Natarajan, the King of
Dancers. Then the doors slammed shut.

Then opened to show a pile of rice, Shiva in the food of India.

Seven times the God was covered and revealed -- Natarajan at the center
of all the elements, dancing even in glowing stone. Each time the doors
swung open the great bell rang and those hundreds in the pressing crowd
saw Shiva at the heart of things.

In flowers, rice, bread, and stone; the Dance. His arms and legs the
tendrils of exploding worlds, his eyes eternal stillness, his smile the
ecstasy. The Dance was at the heart ofevery atom.
