---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 932
Tags:
  - 924
  - 841
  - 670
  - 459
  - 33
  - 803
  - 1003
  - 191
Format: verse
By: Jili
Glossary:
  - Term: maba’
    Definition: Original atoms. Literally, 'fine dust' -- in cosmological
      symbolism, materia prima.
Commentary: |
  'The relationship in the spiritually perfect man between the Divine Reality
  (Haqiqah) and the individuality that still subsists, is one of the most
  difficult of things to grasp： for the man who has reached this perfection,
  the Divine Reality in effect is no longer "veiled” by anything, whereas the
  individual consciousness is by definition a "veil" (hijâb) and only exists
  inasmuch as it “refracts” the blinding light of the divine Intellect’
  (Burckhardt： Introd. Doct, ésotériques de l'Islam, pp. 81-82). It is not
  the individuality as such that realizes Union, as has already been stressed
  in the Introduction to the preceding chapter; while neither is it excluded
  from intimate participation in that which essentially allows of no
  ‘objectification’.S
---
Mine is the kingdom in both worlds; I saw therein none but myself, that I
 should hope his favour or fear him.
Before me is no ‘before’, that I should follow its condition, and after
 me is no 'after’, that I should precede its notion.
I have made all kinds of perfection mine own, and lo, I am the beauty of
 the majesty of the Whole; I am naught but It.
Whatsoever thou seest of minerals and plants and animals, together with Man
 and his qualities,
And whatsoever thou seest of elements and nature and original atoms (haba’)
 whereof the substance is (ethereal as) a perfume,
And whatsoever thou seest of seas and deserts and trees and high-topped
 mountains.
And whatsoever thou seest of spiritual forms and of things visible whose
 countenance is goodly to behold,
And whatsoever thou seest of thought and imagination and intelligence and
 soul, and heart with its inwards,
And whatsoever thou seest of angelic aspect, or of phenomena whereof Satan
 is the spirit.

 ...

Lo, I am that whole, and that whole is my theatre; ’tis I. not it, that
 is displayed in its reality.
Verily, I am a Providence and Prince to mankind; the entire creation is a
 name, and my essence is the object named.
The sensible world is mine and the angel-world is of my weaving and fashioning;
 the unseen world is mine and the world of omnipotence springs from me.
And mark! In all that I have mentioned I am a slave returning from the
 Essence to his Lord --
Poor, despised, lowly, self-abasing, sin’s captive, in the bonds of his
 trespasses.
