---
By: Manhae
Format: verse
Source:
  ID: e13d8994-eff6-4830-981a-b30658d44b81
  Locus:
    Page: 59-61
    Number: 52
Title: Pledging Love at the Shrine of Non'gae
---
Namgang River flows day and night but still remains.
In wind and rain Ch’oksok Pavilion stands vacant and flees
 with the arrow of time.
Non'gae, my love, you make me laugh and cry at once.
You are a fine flower that bloomed on the grave of Choson;
your fragrance doesn’t decay.
As a poet, I’ve become your lover.

Where are you? You’re undying but can’t be found in this world.
I think of your life, fragrant and sad like a flower cut by a golden knife.
Your gentle song, choking on the smell of wine,
wrung tears from the corrupt swords in prison.
A terrifying chill swirled your dancing sleeves;
it reached the flower beds in the land of the dead and froze
 the setting sun.
Your delicate heart was calm, but more chilling than had you trembled.
Your guileless eyes were smiling, but were sadder than had they cried.
Turning from red to blue then white,
were your lips the smile of the morning cloud?
The crying of evening rain?
The secret of the moon at dusk?
The sign of dew?

The flowers unplucked by your jewel hands reddened With shame.
The prints of your jade-white heels on the riverbank
have been covered by the green of arrogant old moss.

Your house is an empty tomb, but I still call it your home.
Without a house even in name, I have no way of calling you.
I’m fond of flowers, but can’t pick the ones blooming on your grave.
If I did, my insides would be plucked out first.
I’m fond of flowers, but can’t plant them on your grave.
If I did, thorns would be planted in my heart first.

Forgive me, Non’gae. It is I, not you, who broke our pledge.
Forgive me, Non’gae. It is you, not I, who wept bitterly in your solitary bed.
Even if I wrote “love” in golden letters on my heart
  and raised it as a monument,
what comfort would it give you?
Even if I branded a melody of tears upon my song
  and rang it as a memorial bell,
what absolution would it give me?
One unforgettable pledge -- no other woman will have my love.
Forgive me, Non’gae.
If you do, even the faults I have kept from the gods will vanish.

Non’gae, you live a thousand autumns.
Non’gae, you last not even a day.
So joyful am I to love you, and so sad.
My laughter brims over and becomes tears;
my tears overflow and become laughter.
Forgive me, my beloved Non’gae.
