---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 56-57
  Source:
    Title: The Pregnant Virgin
By: Marion Woodman
---
Body awareness has become an important locus in my analytic practice because
of my experience with both women and tnen who, despite earnest commitment
to their dreams and to their own growth, are still unable to trust the
process. Their souls are dislocated in bodies so wounded that the ego's
willingness in itself is simply not enough.

Failure in travailing life's iunctures is not necessarily the failure of
the ego to adopt a new attitude toward the Self by sacrificing the old. Many
of my analysands have what I believe to be appropriate ego attitudes; their
bodies, however, have at some point been traumatized. While their egos can
be approached through conltontation, challenge or humor, their bodies cannot
respond. The more quickly the ego moves ahead, the more terrorized the body
becomes. The task then is to find some means of going back to the point of
wounding to reconnect with the abandoned child. The body, like the child,
tells the truth, and tells it through movement or lack of movement.

A trained observer can discern whether the soul has taken up residence in the
body, or whether the body image is so intolerable that the flesh is barely
inhabited. The body can be so retarded that it cannot even imagine itself as
an adult. If, as James Hillman says“ “the image by which the flesh lives
is the ultimate ruling necessity," then some means must be found to create
an adequate image -- physically as well as psychiatlly. Body awareness, as I
understand it, has nothing to do with the technology of the body. It is not
fitness or longevity that is at stake, although these may be by-products. What
is at stake is the integration ot‘body, soul and spirit.

So long as we are in this world, the psyche is enacted through the medium
of the body. William Blake described the body as “that portion of Soul
discerned by the five Senses." The soul is, ofcourse, much more than the bodily
"portion" of itself. It is not limited to manifesting in the physical body;
it manifests also in that infinite body which constitutes the "body" of the
imagination, a body that includes the entire visionary world of the arts
-- music, sculpture, painting, poetry, dance, architecture. Each of these
visionary or imaginary worlds may be thought of as larger human bodies,
or a single giant human body. That it may act in another world, of which
the arts are an expression, is one of the oldest speculations about the
immortality of the soul, and art as an expression of it.

The soul, then, manifests in a multiplicity of forms. While it is on earth,
it must have a body image as its home, as its primary medium of expression.
The soul will not naturally reject its body image any more than the mother's
breast will naturally reject her baby. The body mirrors the soul. Where
rejection occurs, something has gone seriously wrong. But no matter what went
wrong, the soul will do everything in its power to correct it. How then do we
explain the blockage of the body as the soul’s medium ofexpression? Seen
from this point of view, anorexia nervosa and bulimia, for example, are the
result of an abnormal release of psychic energy in an effort to overcome body
blockage. Obesity is a manifestation of a soul that has more energy than the
body can deal with.

Blocked bodies, metaphorically (sometimes literally), have hardened arteries,
arteries blocked by too much cholesterol that makes it hard for the heart
to pump blood through the system. They place mounting obstacles in the way
of psychic energy. The result is that the energy has to find other modes
of action, other modes of expression. Some of these are very creative and
make for brilliant careers in the professions and the arts. But always,
people whose psychic energy has had to carve out other channels of expression
because their bodies were blocked, are haunted by their refusal, conscious or
unconscious, to permit their souls to take up residence in their bodies. The
result is that, without quite understanding what they are feeling or why they
are feeling it, they are possessed by homeless souls who wander like ghosts
in a bleak twilight zone where they cannot find shelter or rest. They are
haunted by their own wandering souls that hover somewhere near the earth,
crying in vain to be let in. Refusing them entrance into their own bodies,
such people become the enemies of their souls. They unconsciously realize
that they have sentenced their souls to perpetual exile.
