---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 53-54
  Source:
    Title: The Divine Milieu
By: Pierre Teilhard de Chardin
---
Where are the roots of our being? In the first place they plunge back and
down into the unfathomable past. How great is the mystery of the first cells
which were one day animated by the breath ofour souls! How impossible to
decipher the synthesis of successive influences in which we are for ever
incorporated! In each one of us, through matter, the whole history of the
world is in part reflected. And however autonomous our soul, it is heir to
an existence worked upon from all sides -- before it came into being -- by
the totality of the energies of the earth： it meets and rejoins life at a
determined level. Then, hardly has it entered actively into the universe at
that particular point than it feels, in its turn, besieged and penetrated by
the flow of cosmic influences which have to be ordered and assimilated. Let
us look around us： the waves come from all sides and from the farthest
horizon. Through every cleft the sensible world inundates us with its riches --
food for the body, nourishment for the eyes, harmony of sounds and fulness of
the heart, unknown phenomena and new truths, all these treasures, all these
urges, all these calls, coming from the four quarters of the world, pass
through our consciousness at every moment. What is their role within us? What
will their effect be, even if we receive them passively or indistinctly,
like bad workmen? They will merge into the most intimate life of our soul,
and either develop it or poison it. We only have to look at ourselves for
one moment to realise this, and feel either delight or anxiety. If even
the most humble and most material of our nourishment is capable of deeply
influencing our most spiritual faculties, what can be said of the infinitely
more penetrating energies conveyed to us by the music of tones, of notes, of
words, of ideas? We have not, in us, a body to be nourished independently of
our soul. Everything that the body has admitted and has begun to transform must
be sublimated by the soul in its turn. The soul does this, no doubt, in its own
way and with its own dignity. But it cannot escape from this universal contact
nor from that unremitting labour. And that is how the characteristic power
of understanding and loving, which will form its immaterial individuality,
is gradually perfected in it for its own good and at its own risk. We hardly
know in what proportions and under what guise our natural faculties will
pass over into the final act of the divine vision. But it can hardly be
doubted that, with God's help, it is here below that we give ourselves the
eyes and the heart which a final transfiguration will transmute into organs
of a capacity for adoration and beatification special to each one of us.

The masters of the spiritual life continue to repeat that God wants only
souls. To give those words their true value, we must not forget that the
human soul, however independently created our philosophy imagines it to be, is
inseparable, in its birth and in its growth, from the universe into which it
is born. In each soul, God loves and partly saves the whole world which that
soul sums up in an incommunicable and particular way. Now this summing-up,
this synthesis is not given to us ready-made and complete with the first
awakening of consciousness. It is we who, through our own activity, must
industriously assemble the widely scattered elements. The labour of seaweed
as it concentrates in its tissues the substances dispersed, in infinitesimal
quantities, throughout the vast layers of the ocean; the industry of bees
as they make honey from the juices scattered in so many flowers -- these
are but pale images of the continuous process of elaboration which all the
forces of the universe undergo in us in order to become spirit.
