---
By: Willa Sibert Cather
Source:
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "4 - \u4DC3 - Meng"
    Line: 2
    Page: 28-29
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
---
Polly bent over him and wiped the moisture from his face, "Oh, I'm so
glad it's over!" she broke out impulsively. "It just broke my heart to
see you suffer so, Father."

Rosicky motioned her to sit down on the chair where the tea~kettle had been,
and looked up at her with that lively affectionate gleam in his eyes. "You
was awful good to me, I won't never forgit dat. I hate it to be sick on
you like dis. Down at de barn I say to myself, dat young girl ain't had
much experience in sickness, I don't want to scare her, an' maybe she's
got a baby comin' or somet'ing."

Polly took his hand. He was looking at her so intently and affectionately
and confidingly; his eyes seemed to caress her face, to regard it with
pleasure. She frowned with her funny streaks of eyebrows, and then smiled
back at him.

"I guess maybe there is something of that kind going to happen. But I haven't
told anyone yet, not my mother or Rudolph. You'll be the first to know."
His hands pressed hers. She noticed that it was warm again. The twinkle in
his yellow-brown eyes seemed to come nearer.

"I like mighty well to see dat little child, Polly," was all he said. Then
he closed his eyes and lay half-smiling. But Polly sat still, thinking
hard. She had a sudden feeling that nobody in the world, not her mother, not
Rudolph, or anyone, really loved her as much as old Rosicky did. It perplexed
her. She sat frowning and trying to puzzle it out. It was as if Rosicky had
a special gift for loving people, something that was like an ear for music
or an eye for colour. It was quiet, unobtrusive; it was merely there. You
saw it in his eyes, -- perhaps that was why they were merry. You felt it in
his hands, too. As he dropped off to sleep, she sat holding his warm, broad
flexible brown hand. She had never seen another in the least like it. She
wondered if it wasn't a kind of gypsy hand, it was so alive and quick and
light in its communications, -- very strange in a farmer. Nearly all the
farmers she knew had huge lumps of fists, like mauls, or they were knotty and
bony and uncomfortable-looking, with stiff fingers. But Rosicky's was like
quicksilver, flexible, muscular, about the colour of a pale cigar, with deep,
deep creases across the palm. It wasn't nervous, it wasn't a stupid lump;
it was a warm brown human hand, with some cleverness in it, a great deal of
generosity, and something else which Polly could only call "gypsy-like," --
something nimble and lively and sure, in the way that animals are.

Polly remembered that hour long afterwards, it had been like an awakening
to her. It seemed to her that she had never learned so much about life
from anything as from old Rosicky's hand. It brought her to herself;
it communicated some direct and untranslatable message.
