---
Tags:
  - The Quest=The Fire Beyond the Tomb - Contemplating God, Faith, and Truth
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 5-6
  Source:
    Title: The Great Code
By: Northrup Frye
References:
  - Title: Exodus
    Locus: 3:14
---
What I am concerned with at present is not the question whether God is dead
or obsolete, but with the question ofwhat resources oflanguage may be dead
or obsolete. The metaphorical and metonymic phases of language have been in
large measure outgrown becau5e ofthe obvious limitations that they imposed
on the human mind. But it seems Clear that the descriptive phase also has
limitations, in a world where its distinction of subject and object so
often does not work. There is no question ofgiving up descriptive language,
only of relating it to a broader spectrum of verbal expression. The word
“God” is a noun, and so falls into the category of things and objects. For
metonymic writing this is not an insuperable problem： what is beyond all
things and objects can still be a noun, or at any rate have a name. For
most writers of the second phase, God represents an immutable being, set
over against the dissolving flow of the world of becoming in which we are;
and practically the only grammatical device for conveying this sense of the
immutable is the abstract noun. For third-phase writing, founded as it is on
a sense-apprehended distinction between objects that are there and objects
that are not, “God” can go only into the illusory class. But perhaps
this kind ofnoun-thinking is, at least here, a fallacy of the type that
Whitehead calls a fallacy of misplaced concreteness.

In Exodus 3：14, though God also gives himselfa name, he defines himself
(according to the AV) as “I am that I am," which scholars say is more
accurately rendered “I will be what I will be.” That is, we might come
closer to what is meant in the Bible by the word “God” if we understood
it as a verb, and not a verb of simple asserted existence but a verb implying
a process accomplishing itself This would involve trying to think our way
back to a conception oflanguage in which words were words of power, conveying
primarily the sense of forces and energies rather than analogues of physical
bodies. To some extent this would be a reversion to the metaphorical language
of primitive communities, as our earlier references to a cycle of language
and the “primitive” word “mana” suggested. But it would also be
oddly contemporary with post-Einsteinian physics, where atoms and electrons
are no longer thought ofas things but rather as traces ofprocesses. God may
have lost his function as the subject or object ofa predicate, but may not
be so much dead as entombed in a dead language.
