---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 849-850
  Source:
    Title: Sukhâvatîvyûha Sûtra
    Locus: 15, 19, 24
Tags:
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Ultimate Felicity
  - Discernment-Truth=The Eye Of Eternity-Supreme Center=The Celestial City
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Incorruptibility
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation=Error
---
This world Sukhavati (Pure Land), Ananda, which is the world system of the
Lord Amitabha, is rich and prosperous, comfortable, fertile, delightful
and crowded with many Gods and men. And in this world system. Ananda, there
are no hells, no animals, no ghosts, no Asuras and none of the inauspicious
places of rebirth. ...

Moreoever, Ananda, all the beings who have been reborn in this world-system
Sukhavati, who are reborn in it, or who will be reborn in it, they will be
exactly like the Paranirmitavasavartin Gods; of the same colour, strength,
vigour, height and breadth, dominion, store of merit and keenness of
super-knowledge; they enjoy the same dresses, ornaments, parks, palaces
and pointed towers, the same kind of forms, sounds, smells, tastes and
touchables, just the same kinds of enjoyments. And the beings in the
world-system Sukhavati do not eat gross food, like soup or raw sugar; but
whatever food they may wish for, that they perceive as eaten, and they become
gratified in body and mind, without there being any further need to throw the
food into the body. And if, after their bodies are gratified, they wish for
certain perfumes, then the whole of that Buddha-field becomes scented with
just that kind of heavenly perfume. But if someone does not wish to smell
that perfume, then the perception of it does not reach him. In the same
way, whatever they may wish for, comes to them, be it musical instruments,
banners, flags, etc.; or cloaks of different colours, or ornaments of various
kinds. If they wish for a palace of a certain colour, distinguishing marks,
construction, height and width, made of various precious things, adorned with
hundreds of thousands of pinnacles, while inside it various heavenly woven
materials are spread out, and it is full of couches strewn with beautiful
cushions,-then just such a palace appears before them. In those delightful
palaces, surrounded and honoured by seven times seven thousand Apsaras,
they dwell, play, enjoy and disport themselves. ...

And all the beings who have been born, who are born, who will be born in
this Buddha-field, they all are fixed on the right method of salvation,
until they have won Nirvana. And why? Because there is here no place for
and no conception of the two other groups, i.e, of those who are not fixed
at all, and those who are fixed on wrong ways. For this reason also that
world-system is called the ‘Happy Land’.
