---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: X
    Page: 39-40
Title: How a man shall know when his thought is no sin; and if it be
  sin, when it is deadly and when it is venial
---
But it is not thus of the remembrance of any man or woman living in this
life, or of any bodily or worldly thing whatsoever that it be. For why,
a naked sudden thought of any of them, pressing against thy will and thy
witting, although it be no sin imputed unto thee -- for it is the pain of the
original sin pressing against thy power, of the which sin thou art cleansed
in thy baptism -- nevertheless yet if this sudden stirring or thought be
not smitten soon down, as fast for frailty thy fleshly heart is strained
thereby： with some manner of liking, if it be a thing that pleaseth thee
or hath pleased thee before, or else with some manner of grumbling, if it
be a thing that thee think grieveth thee, or hath grieved thee before. The
which fastening, although it may in fleshly living men and women that be in
deadly sin before be deadly; nevertheless in thee and in all other that have
in a true will forsaken the world, and are obliged unto any degree in devout
living in Holy Church, what so it be, privy or open, and thereto that will
be ruled not after their own will and their own wit, but after the will and
the counsel of their sovereigns, what so they be, religious or seculars,
such a liking or a grumbling fastened in the fleshly heart is but venial
sin. The cause of this is the grounding and the rooting of your intent in
God, made in the beginning of your living in that state that ye stand in,
by the witness and the counsel of some discreet father.

But if it so be, that this liking or grumbling fastened in thy fleshly heart
be suffered so long to abide unreproved, that then at the last it is fastened
to the ghostly heart, that is to say the will, with a full consent： then,
it is deadly sin. And this befalleth when thou or any of them that I speak
of wilfully draw upon thee the remembrance of any man or woman living in
this life, or of any bodily or worldly thing other： insomuch, that if
it be a thing the which grieveth or hath grieved thee before, there riseth
in thee an angry passion and an appetite of vengeance, the which is called
Wrath. Or else a fell disdain and a manner of loathsomeness of their person,
with despiteful and condemning thoughts, the which is called Envy. Or else
a weariness and an unlistiness of any good occupation bodily or ghostly,
the which is called Sloth.

And if it be a thing that pleaseth thee, or hath pleased thee before,
there riseth in thee a passing delight for to think on that thing what so it
be. Insomuch, that thou restest thee in that thought, and finally fastenest
thine heart and thy will thereto, and feedest thy fleshly heart therewith：
so that thee think for the time that thou covetest none other wealth, but
to live ever in such a peace and rest with that thing that thou thinkest
upon. If this thought that thou thus drawest upon thee, or else receivest
when it is put unto thee, and that thou restest thee thus in with delight,
be worthiness of nature or of knowing, of grace or of degree, of favour or of
fairhead, then it is Pride. And if it be any manner of worldly good, riches
or chattels, or what that man may have or be lord of, then it is Covetyse. If
it be dainty meats and drinks, or any manner of delights that man may taste,
then it is Gluttony. And if it be love or plesaunce, or any manner of fleshly
dalliance, glosing or flattering of any man or woman living in this life,
or of thyself either： then it is Lechery.
