---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 173
Tags:
  - Sacrifice-Death=Volition, Obedience and Conformity=Intention
  - Life-Love=Charity=Benevolence and Compassion
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=Materia Prima and Human Perfection
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=Attributes of Holiness
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Integration
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man=The Command to Perfection
By: William Law
---
What now can be so desirable to a sober, sensible man as to have the
vain, disorderly passions of his own corrupted heart removed from him,
to be filled with such unity, love, and concord as flows from God. to
stand united to and co-operating with the divine goodness, willing
nothing but what God wills, loving nothing but what God loves, and
doing all the good that he can to every creature, from a principle of
love and conformity to God? Then the kingdom of God is come, and His
will is done in that soul, as it is done in Heaven. Then Heaven itself
is in the soul and the life and conversation of the soul is in Heaven.
From such a man the curse of this world is removed; he walks upon
consecrated ground, and everything he meets, everything that happens
to him. helps forward his union and communion with God. For it is the
state of our will that makes the state of our life; when we receive
everything from God and do everything for God. everything does us the
same good and helps us to the same degree of happiness. Sickness and
health, prosperity and adversity, bless and purify such a soul in the
same degree; as it turns everything towards God, so everything becomes
divine to it. For he that seeks God in everything is sure to find God
in everything. When we thus live wholly unto God. God is wholly ours
and we are then happy in all the happiness of God： for by uniting
with Him in heart, and will, and spirit, we are united to all that He
is and has in Himself. This is the purity and perfection of life that
we pray for in the Lord’s Prayer, that God’s kingdom may come and His
will be done in us, as it is in Heaven. And this we may be sure is not
only necessary, but attainable by us, or our Saviour would not have
made it a part of our daily prayer.
