---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 452
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Sorcery
By: Clement of Alexandria
References:
  - Body: |
      It is too easy to give the name of Satanism to what one doesn’t
      understand. To admit Satanism, it is first of all necessary to admit
      the existence of Satan. ...

      If we adopt ... scientific terminology, stripped of all poetry, we see
      that the divine Power is reduced quite simply into two fluids'with
      contrary poles. ... When we are told that sessions of the sabbath
      terminated in a general prostitution, nothing is more believable. ...
      One sees therefore that what the early Christians called shameful
      practices were in reality but the factors necessary for the success of
      magical operations. ... The kiss of the Templars on the sacral plexus
      was therefore only a symbolical gesture, implying that the end to be
      obtained by each adept of the Order was ecstasy, or more exactly, to
      find himself in direct rapport with the higher entities, through the
      intermediary of the fluid. ... Formerly it was claimed that sorcerers
      invoked the dead： today the spiritualists do nothing other than
      this： it is only the methods that change. ...

      Thus it is that the cult of Belphagor has come down to us, as a
      magical operation, the Sabbath, the Black Mass.

      This cult of Belphagor was without doubt a simple act of
      spiritualism： one invoked in the Temple the disincamated souls.

      What would prove it to us is the presence of women among the
      officiants in these types of ceremonies.

      These women were probably mediums who facilitated the phenomena of
      materialization or the transmission of thought. ...

      The idea that the ceremony ended in a general prostitution is probably
      not exaggerated, if one assumes that they used melodies, blood, in a
      word everything that can overheat the atmosphere.

      But nevertheless, the result was obtained, which consisted in putting
      oneself for a given time in relation with the astral.
  - Source: Jean Ligniéres： Les Messes Noires, Paris, Librairie ‘Astra’.
      1947. passim
  - Commentary: This view of things is corroborated by a British psychiatrist
      of the Jungian school： ‘There is little doubt that, logical thinking
      being predominantly a male function and intuition a female one, the
      persecution of witches in Europe was largely due to an over-systematized
      phase of man-dominated religion that led men to suspect all truly
      intuitive activities of women as bad and therefore as something to be
      eradicated at all cost -- at the cost, as it has indeed turned out,
      of devitalizing men’s own spiritual understanding, as is so
      evident to-day. (John Layard： The Lady of the Hare, London. Faber &
      Faber. 1944. p. 203).
---
The night discloses to the initiated the mysteries of impudicity.
Flaming torches throw light upon the utmost excesses of debauchery;
the night has not darkness enough to veil it all.
