---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 15 - ䷎ - Ch'ien
    Line: 4
    Page: 111-112
By: Izaak Walton
---
He [Dr. Donne] was once, and but once, clouded with the King’s
displeasure, and it was about this time; which was occasioned by some
malicious whisperer, who had told His Majesty that Dr. Donne had put on
the general humour of the pulpits, and was becoming busy in insinuating a
fear of the King’s inclining to Popery, and a dislike of his government;
and particularly for the King’s then turning the evening Lectures into
Catechising, and expounding the Prayer of our Lord, and of the Belief
and Commandments. His Majesty was the more inclinable to be lieve this,
for that person of Nobility and great note, betwixt whom and Dr. Donne
there had been a great friendship, was at this very time discarded by the
Court -- I shall forbear his name, unless I had a fairer occasion-- and
justly committed to prison; which begot many rumours in the common people,
who in this nation think they are not wise, unless they be busy about what
they understand not, and especially about religion.

The King received the news with so much discontent and restlessness,
that he would not suffer the sun to set and leave him under doubt; but
sent for Dr. Donne, and required his answer to the accusation; which was
so clear and satisfactory, that the King said, “he was right glad he
rested no longer under the suspicion.” When the King had said this,
Dr. Donne kneeled down and thanked his Majesty, and protested his answer
was faithful, and free from all collusion, and therefore, “desired
that he might not rise till, as in like cases, he always had from God,
so he might have from his Majesty, some assurance that he stood clear
and fair in his opinion.” At which the King raised him from his knees
with his own hands, and " protested he believed him; and that he knew he
was an honest man, and doubted not but that he loved him truly.” And,
having thus dismissed him, he called some Lords of his Council into his
chamber, and said with much earnestness, “My doctor is an honest man;
and, my Lords, I was never better satisfied with an answer than he hath
now made me; and 1 always rejoice when I think that by my means he became
a Divine.”
