---
Tags:
  - The Quest=Finding the Soul and the Flowering of the Spirit
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 64-65
  Source:
    Title: Twin Souls
By:
  - Patricia Joudry
  - Maurie D. Pressman
---
Oh thou soul, endowed with the dignity of choice, which will you take, the
race toward life or drift toward death? Will you labor to scale the pinnacle
of Selfhood, alone leading to union and bliss, or by way of descent, through
dimming consciousness and the unraveling of Self, re-enter the Unformed and
await a new Creation?

Here -- oh look quickly before it hides behind one ofits thousand masks --
here it lies, coiled at the centre of every fear known to humankind -- the
Original Fear： loss of being. Ages-old, primeval fear, fear of the fall from
I am to I am not, formless recall from before the long breath of Creation,
from the very deeps of the Mind of God, where dissolution and reabsorption
are purged of their agony and the terror passes into the Great Memory.

To be obliterated, extinguished, waters closing over where once was I,
individual, unique among others. And is it with the spiritual death as with
the small human dying, that the whole life repeats before the eye in its
moment of closing?

Think of it! The I, perceived all at once, its infinitude finally encapsuled,
too late revealed. I! formed from a thousand forms, made from billions of
years, millions of births and deaths, composed more of minutes and seconds
than of years, for I cannot exult in a year but can feel an instant expand
me to the limits of joy, a limit always widening toward the limitless. I,
born and cherished of families uncounted, perhaps exalted by multitudes,
revered in the trappings of royalty, no doubt burned at stakes and hanged
from ancient trees... and no scrap of it without purpose and gain. I of so
many talentsl My fingers hold memories of stringed instruments, sculptors'
clay, soft hair of my thousands of children. I have spoken with the tongues
of all countries, lived, bled and died in the skin of all races, inhabited
cities now buried deep under the earth, their life still vibrant within the
Collective Mind.

And always, in all times and all places, I have loved. I have followed,
hand over hand, the invisible thread that runs through the centre of all
and which, if it were to be snapped, would cause the whole of Creation to
spill into the Void.

I am fed by the Universe and feed it also, for all that I gain by my labors
is given into the whole; and all others’ advances advance me, enmeshed in
the web of the great purposeful Life.

But if I move out of position, disturbing the exquisite balance which holds
me in perfect relation to all? There will be an immense shift in the whole as
aid rushes to me. But I am the mover and chooser, and respect will be shown
for my will. I may refuse the aid： I am allowed. I may fall. I may vacate
my place： none will refuse me. Perhaps I spin, free-falling and laughing
at the serious God, planning to stop myself when I please.

And long ages after, deep in my fall, when I am helpless and will-less,
even though all Life be held out to stay me, I still must make the saving
grasp -- and find I cannot.

Now to the mourning of God is added the necessity of mending the fabric of
the once-perfect Work. Such a small tear -- might not it be patched? ...
or the space pulled together by a mere closing-in of the nearest souls in
the hierarchy of rejoining?

No： the great mathematical scheme of Departure and Return does not permit
a simple adjustment. Where the smallest part is affected, the largest is
equally affected. In torment and groaning labor the entire created universe
reassembles itself, from the far firmaments to the tiny unopened eye of the
embryo fieldmouse. Oh, had I known my immense significance!
