---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Source:
    Title: The Song of Roland
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "5 - ䷄ - Hsu"
    Description: Judgement
    Page: 43-45
Format: verse
---
When Roland saw the men of France, or dead
Or dying, strewn on every hand, he spake
To Oliver his friend： “God save you, sir,
See you our comrades lying cold in death?
What woe is here for France the beautiful,
Of such men left forlorn! 0 Charles, great King
And friend, why are you not in Ronceval?
Oliver, comrade, how may we bring word
To Charles the King?” But Oliver spake, and said：
“Let be, good friend, I know not. Only this
I know -- to yield us would be worse than death.”

But Roland answered： “I shall wind my horn,
The King will hear it where he marches down
The strait defiles, and so- I pledge you, friend --
The Franks will turn them back.” And Oliver said：
"Shame would it be for you, and lifelong shame
For all your lineage. When I pled with you
To call the King, you would not. Now, alas,
It is too late. The fight is on. If now
You wind your horn, it is not hardihood.
Too late! For both your arms are bathed in blood.”
And he replied： “They have dealt winsome blows."

And Roland, with a wild and fearful blast
Winded his horn, so that his temples brake
And from his mouth leapt the bright blood. And Charles
Heard it, and all his soldiers, as they rode
Down to sweet France through valleys far away.
And the King cried： "It is the horn of Roland!
The Franks are fighting” ...

From Roland’s lips flowed blood; his temples brake
With the wild blast and fearful. But the King
And all his soldiers heard it from afar
And the King cried： “The blast is long and strong!”
And Naimon answered： "Ay, for a brave man
Is in distress, is fighting his last fight. ... ”

And so the king drew rein, and loud and clear
The clarions rang; the Franks leapt from their palfreys,
And armed themselves with hauberks of fine steel,
With helms and golden-hilted swords, and spears
Astream with pennons white and red and blue;
Then mounted steeds of, war, and spurred apace
Through the defiles, and each to the other cried：
"If we but find Count Roland ere he die,
Beside him shall we give good blows.” Alas!
To what avail? They will not come in time.

And when the King had come to Ronceval
And rode among the dead, he wept, and said
To his chief men： “My lords, rein in your steeds,
For I would fain precede you. Let me find
My nephew Roland ere you follow. Ay --
Years ago, in my vaulted hall at Aix,
Methinks it was a Christmastide~my knights
Were vaunting them of prowess and high deeds
Upon the field of battle, and Roland said
That he should never die in a strange land
Save at the head of all his men, with face
Turned to the foe, and victory in his heart.”
He spake, and went before the rest, the space
One throws a spear, and climbed to a high hill.
