---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 210-211
  Source:
    Title: Uncommon Wisdom
By: Fritjof Capra
---
On the very next evening I had another, no less extraordinary experience of
Indian art, this time ofmovement, dance, and ritual. It was a performance
of Odissi, one of the classical Indian dance forms. In India, dance has
formed an integral part of worship from ancient times and is still one
of the purest artistic expressions of spirituality. Every performance of
classical dance is a dance drama in which the artist enacts well-known
stories from Hindu mythology by communicating a series of emotions through
abhinaya -- an elaborate language of stylized body postures, gestures,
and facial expressions. In Odissi dance, the classical poses are the same
as those of the deities in the Hindu temples.

I went to the performance with a group of young people whom I had met after
one of my lectures, one of them a student of Odissi dance herself. They
told me very excitedly that the special attraction of that evening was
not only to see Sanjukta Panigrahi, India’s foremost Odissi dancer,
but also her celebrated guru, Keluchara Mohaparta, who does not generally
dance in public. This evening, however “Guruji,” as everybody called
him, would also dance.

Before the performance, my dancer friend and a fellow student of hers took
me backstage to meet their dance teacher and, possibly, to see Guruji and
Sanjukta prepare themselves for the performance. When the two young women
encountered their teacher they bowed down and touched with their right
hands first the teacher’s feet and then their own foreheads. They did
so with natural, flowing ease; their gestures hardly interrupted their
movements and conversation. After I was introduced we were allowed to
peek into an adjoining area where Sanjukta and Guruji were engaged in an
intimate ritual. Fully dressed for the performance, they faced each other
in prayer, whispering intensely and with closed eyes. It was a scene of
utmost concentration, which ended with Guruji blessing his student and
kissing her on the forehead.

I was amazed by Sanjukta's elaborate dress, makeup, and jewelry, but I
was even more fascinated by Guruji. I saw a pouchy older man, half bald,
with a delicate, strange, and compelling face that transcended conventional
notions of male and female, young and old. He wore very little makeup and
was dressed in some kind of ritualistic garment, which left his torso naked.

The performance was magnificent. The dancers evoked a ceaseless stream
of emotions through a dazzling display of the most refined movements and
gestures. Sanjukta’s poses were fascinating. It seemed to me as if the
ancient stone sculptures, which were so fresh in my memory, had suddenly
come alive.

The most wondrous experience, however, was to see Guruji perform the
initial invocation and offering, which begins every performance of classical
Indian dance. He appeared at the left of the stage with a plate of burning
candles in his hand, which he carried across the stage as an offering
to a deity represented by a small statue. To see this oddly beautiful
old man float across the stage in swirling, twisting, flowing movements,
the candles flickering all about him, was an unforgettable experience of
magic and ritual. I sat there spellbound, staring at Guruji as ifhe were
some being from another world, a personification of archetypal movement.
