---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Mary
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 233- 237
  Source:
    Title: American Ghosts and Old World Wonders
By: Angela Carter
Title: The Wrightsman Magdalene
---
After it was all over, Mary, the mother of Jesus, together with the other
Mary, the mother of St. John, and the Mary Magdalene, the repentant
harlot, went down to the seashore; a woman named Fatima, a servant,
went with them. They stepped into a boat, they threw away the rudder,
they permitted the sea to take them where it wanted. It beached them near
Marseilles. Don’t run away with the idea that the South of France was
an easy option compared to the deserts ofSyria, of Egypt, or the wastes
ofCappadocia, where other early saints, likewise driven by the imperious
need for solitude, found arid, inhospitable crevices in which to contemplate
the ineffable. There were clean, square, white, modern cities all along the
Mediterranean coast -- everywhere except the place the three Marys landed
with their servant. They landed in the middle of a malarial swamp. And
there the two stern mothers and Fatima -- don’t forget Fatima -- set
up a chapel, at the place we now call Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer. There
they stayed. But the other Mary, the Magdalene, could not stop. Impelled
by the demon ofloneliness, she went offon her own through the Camargue;
then she crossed limestone hill after limestone hill. Flints cut her feet,
sun burned her skin. She ate fruit that had fallen from the tree of its own
accord, like a perfect Manichean. She ate dropped berries. The black-browed
Palestinian woman walked in silence, gaunt as famine, hairy as a dog.

She walked until she came to the forest of the Sainte-Baume. She walked
until she came to the remotest part of the forest. There she found a
cave. There she stopped. There she prayed. She did not speak to another
human being, she did not see another human being, for thirty-three years,
or so they say. Mary Magdalene, the Venus in sackcloth. Georges de La
Tour’s picture does not show a woman in sackcloth, but her chemise is
coarse and simple enough to be a penitential garment, or, at least, the
kind of garment that shows you were not thinking of personal adornment
when you put it on. And even though the chemise is deeply open on the
bosom, it does not seem to disclose flesh as such, but a flesh that has
more akin to the wax ofthe burning candle, to the way the wax candle is
irradiated by its own flame, and glows. So you could say that, from the
waist up, this Mary Magdalene is on the high road to penitence, but, from
the waist down, there is the question of her long, red skirt. Leftvover
finery? Was it the only frock she had, the frock she went whoring in,
then repented in, then set sailing in? Did she walk all the way to the
Sainte-Baume in this red skirt? It doesn’t look travel-stained or
worn or torn. It still has a luxurious, even a faintly scandalous air --
a scarlet dress for a scarlet woman.

The Virgin Mary wears blue. Her preference has sanctified the colour. We
think of a “heavenly” blue. But Mary Magdalene wears red, the
colour ofpassion. The two women are twin paradoxes. One is not what the
other is. One is a virgin and a mother; the other is a non-virgin, and
childless. (Note how the English language doesn’t contain a specific
word to describe a woman who is grown-up, sexually mature and not a mother,
unless such a woman is using her sexuality as her profession.)

Because Mary Magdalene is a woman and childless she goes out into the
wilderness. The others, the mothers, stay and make a church, where people
come. But why has she taken her pearl necklace with her? Look at it,
lying in front of the mirror. And her long hair has been most beautifully
brushed. Is she, yet, fully repentant?

In Georges de La Tour’s painting, the Magdalene’s hair is
well-brushed. Sometimes the Magdalene’s hair is as shaggy as a
Rastafarian’s. Sometimes her hair hangs down upon, is inextricably mixed
up with, her furs. Mary Magdalene is easier to read when she is hairy,
when, in the wilderness, she wears the rough coat of her own desires,
as if the desires of her past have turned into the hairy shirt that
torments her present, repentant flesh. Sometimes she wears only her hair,
it never saw a comb, long, matted, unkempt, hanging down to her knees. She
belts her own hair round her waist with the rope with which, each night,
she lashes herself, making a rough tunic ofit. On these occasions,
the transformation from the young, lovely, voluptuous Mary Magdalene,
the happy non-virgin, the party girl, the woman taken in adultery --
on these occasions, the transformation is complete. She has turned into
something wild and strange, into a female version of John the Baptist,
a hairy hermit, as good as naked, transcending gender, sex obliterated,
nakedness irrelevant. Now she is one with such pole-sitters as Simeon
Stylites, and other solitary cave-dwellers who communed with beasts,
like St. Jerome. She eats herbs, drinks water from the pool; she comes to
resemble an even earlier incarnation of the “wild man of the woods”
than John the Baptist. Now she looks like hairy Engidu, from the Babylonian
epic ofGilgamesh. The woman who once, in her grand, red dress, was vice
personified, has now retired to an existential situation in which vice
simply isn’t possible. In her new, resplendent animality, she is now
beyond choice. Now she has no option but virtue.

But there is another way oflooking at it. Think of Donatellos Magdalene,
in Florence -- she’s dried-up by the suns of the wilderness, battered
by wind and rain, anorexic, toothless, a body entirely annihilated by the
soul. You can almost smell the odour ofthe kind of sanctity that reeks from
her -- it’s rank, its raw, it’s horrible. By the ardour with which
she has embraced the rigorous asceticism of penitence, you can tell how
much she hated her early life of so-called pleasure. The mortification of
the flesh comes naturally to her. When you learn that Donatello intended
the piece to be, not black but gilded, that does not lighten its mood.

Nevertheless you can see the point that some anonymous Man of the
Enlightenment on the Grand Tour made two hundred years ago -- how
Donatello’s Mary Magdalene made him “disgusted with penitence.”

Mary Magdalene can illustrate the point at which penitence becomes
sado-masochism.

But it can also become kitsch. Consider the apocryphal story of Mary of
Egypt. Who was a beautiful prostitute until she repented and spent the
remaining forty-seven years of her life as a penitent in the desert,
clothed only in her long hair and fed in perpetuity by the three loaves
she had originally taken with her. This is a voluptuous image of eroticism
and surprise. Mary of Egypt remains clean and fresh throughout. She remains
miraculously unlined. She remains as untouched as the bread which she eats
and which is not consumed. We imagine her sitting on a rock in the desert,
combing her hair, like a lorelei whose water has turned to sand. She has
turned penitence into kitsch.

Georges de La Tour’s Mary Magdalene has not yet arrived at an ecstasy
of repentance, evidently. Perhaps, indeed, he has pictured her as she
is just about to repent -- before her sea voyage, in fact, although I
would prefer to think that this bare, bleak space, furnished only with the
mirror, is that of her cave in the woods. But this is a woman who is still
taking care of herself. Her long, black hair, sleek as that of a Japanese
woman on a painted scroll -- she must just have finished brushing it,
reminding us that she is the patron saint of hairdressers. Her hair is
the product of culture, not left as nature intended. Her hair shows she
has just used the mirror as an instrument of worldly vanity. Her hair
shows that, even as she meditates upon the candle flame, this world still
has a claim upon her. Unless we are actually watching her as her soul is
drawn out into the candle flame.

We meet Mary Magdalene in the gospels, doing something extraordinary
with her hair. After she massaged lesus’ feet with her pot of precious
ointment, she wiped them clean with her hair, an image so astonishing
and erotically precise it is surprising it is represented so rarely
in art, especially that of the seventeenth century, when religious
excess and eroticism went so often together. Magdalene, using her hair,
that beautiful net with which she used to snare men as well as a mop,
a washcloth, a towel. And a slight element ofthe perverse about it,
too. All in all, the kind ofgaudy gesture a repentant prostitute would make.

She has brushed her hair, perhaps for the last time, and taken off her
pearl necklace, also for the last time. Now she is gazing at the candle
flame, which doubles itself in the mirror. Once upon a time, that mirror
was the tool of her trade; it was within the mirror that she assembled
all the elements of the femininity she put together for sale. But now,
instead of reflecting her face, it duplicates the pure flame.

When I was in labour, I thought of a candle flame. I was in labour for
nineteen hours. At first the pains came slowly and were relatively light;
it was easy to ride them. But when they came more closely together, and
grew more and more intense, then I began to concentrate my mind upon an
imaginary candle flame.

Look at the candle flame as if it is the only thing in the world. How
white and steady it is. At the core of the white flame is a cone of
blue, transparent air; that is the thing to look at, that is the thing
to concentrate on. When the pains came thick and fast, I fixed all my
attention on the blue absence at the heart of the flame, as though it
were the secret of the flame and, ifl concentrated enough upon it, it
would become my secret, too.

Soon there was no time to think ofanything else. By then, I was entirely
subsumed by the blue space. Even when they snipped away at my body, down
below, to finally let the baby out the easiest way, all my attention was
concentrated on the core of the flame.

Once the candle flame had done its work, it snuffed itself out; they
wrapped my baby in a shawl and gave him to me.

Mary Magdalene meditates upon the candle flame. She enters the blue core,
the blue absence. She becomes something other than herself.

The silence in the picture, for it is the most silent of pictures,
emanates not from the darkness behind the candle in the mirror but from
those two candles, the real candle and the mirror candle. Between them,
the two candles disseminate light and silence. They have tranced the
woman into enlightenment. She can’t speak, won't speak. In the desert,
she will grunt, maybe, but she will put speech aside, after this, after
she has meditated upon the candle flame and the mirror. She will put
speech aside just as she has put aside her pearl necklace and will put
away her red skirt. The new person, the saint, is being born out of this
intercourse with the candle flame.

But something has already been born out of this intercourse with the
candle flame. See. She carries it already. She carries where, if she
were a Virgin mother and not a sacred whore, she would rest her baby,
not a living child but a memento mori, a skull.
