---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XLIII
    Page: 76
Title: That all witting and feeling of a man’s own being must needs be
  lost if the perfection of this word shall verily be felt in any soul
  in this life
---
Look that nought work in thy wit nor in thy will but only God. And try for to
fell all witting and feeling of ought under God, and tread all down full far
under the cloud of forgetting. And thou shalt understand, that thou shalt
not only in this work forget all other creatures than thyself, or their
deeds or thine, but also thou shalt in this work forget both thyself and
also thy deeds for God, as well as all other creatures and their deeds. For
it is the condition of a perfect lover, not only to love that thing that he
loveth more than himself; but also in a manner for to hate himself for that
thing that he loveth.

Thus shalt thou do with thyself： thou shalt loathe and be weary with all that
thing that worketh in thy wit and in thy will unless it be only God. For why,
surely else, whatsoever that it be, it is betwixt thee and thy God. And no
wonder though thou loathe and hate for to think on thyself, when thou shalt
always feel sin, a foul stinking lump thou wottest never what, betwixt thee
and thy God： the which lump is none other thing than thyself. For thou
shalt think it oned and congealed with the substance of thy being： yea,
as it were without departing.

And therefore break down all witting and feeling of all manner of creatures;
but most busily of thyself. For on the witting and the feeling of thyself
hangeth witting and feeling of all other creatures; for in regard of it, all
other creatures be lightly forgotten. For, an thou wilt busily set thee to
the proof, thou shalt find when thou hast forgotten all other creatures and
all their works -- yea, and thereto all thine own works -- that there shall
live yet after, betwixt thee and thy God, a naked witting and a feeling of
thine own being： the which witting and feeling behoveth always be destroyed,
ere the time be that thou feel soothfastly the perfection of this work.
