---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: V
    Page: 30
Title: That in the time of this word all the creatures that ever have been,
  be now, or ever shall be, and all the works of those same creatures, should
  be hid under the cloud of forgetting
---
And if ever thou shalt come to this cloud and dwell and work therein as I
bid thee, thou behoveth as this cloud of unknowing is above thee, betwixt
thee and thy God, right so put a cloud of forgetting beneath thee; betwixt
thee and all the creatures that ever be made. Thee thinketh, peradventure,
that thou art full far from God because that this cloud of unknowing is
betwixt thee and thy God： but surely, an it be well conceived, thou art
well further from Him when thou hast no cloud of forgetting betwixt thee
and all the creatures that ever be made. As oft as I say, all the creatures
that ever be made, as oft I mean not only the creatures themselves, but also
all the works and the conditions of the same creatures. I take out not one
creature, whether they be bodily creatures or ghostly, nor yet any condition
or work of any creature, whether they be good or evil： but shortly to say,
all should be hid under the cloud of forgetting in this case.

For although it be full profitable sometime to think of certain conditions
and deeds of some certain special creatures, nevertheless yet in this work it
profiteth little or nought. For why? Memory or thinking of any creature that
ever God made, or of any of their deeds either, it is a manner of ghostly
light： for the eye of thy soul is opened on it and even fixed thereupon,
as the eye of a shooter is upon the prick that he shooteth to. And one thing
I tell thee, that all thing that thou thinketh upon, it is above thee for
the time, and betwixt thee and thy God： and insomuch thou art the further
from God, that aught is in thy mind but only God.

Yea! and, if it be courteous and seemly to say, in this work it profiteth
little or nought to think of the kindness or the worthiness of God, nor
on our Lady, nor on the saints or angels in heaven, nor yet on the joys in
heaven： that is to say, with a special beholding to them, as thou wouldest
by that beholding feed and increase thy purpose. I trow that on nowise it
should help in this case and in this work. For although it be good to think
upon the kindness of God, and to love Him and praise Him for it, yet it is
far better to think upon the naked being of Him, and to love Him and praise
Him for Himself.
