---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Strengthening the Self=Consciousness, Transcendence
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 191-194
  Source:
    Title: The Hidden Ground of Love
By: Thomas Merton
Description: A letter to Aldous Huxley from Thomas Merton in
  response to Huxley's article “Drugs That Shape Men’s Minds,”
  which appeared in The Saturday Evening Post of October 1958.
Locus:
  Date: November 27, 1958
References:
  - ID: c7931222-0422-4cb9-ba4c-3ab2c5e4dda2
  - Title: Drugs that Shape Men's Minds
    By: Aldous Huxley
    Source:
      Title: The Saturday Evening Post
      Locus:
        Date: October 1958
---
Twenty years, or nearly that many, have gone by since a very pleasant
exchange of letters took place between us. The other day, in correcting
the proofs of a journal I kept then, and which is being published now, I
was reminded of the fact. I shall send you the book when it appears. The
final entries, in which you are mentioned, will testify to the gratitude
and friendship with which I have continued to remember you since then.

Meanwhile, I am happy to open another discussion with you, and I
intend to do so in a spirit which will, I hope, lead to something quite
constructive. For I assure you that I have no wish whatever to enter into
a silly argument, and that I approach you with none of the crudities
0r prejudices which I am sure annoy you in other clerics. I do not of
course claim to be above the ordinary human failings of religious people,
but I think I am at least relatively free of partisanship and fanaticism.

Your article in The Saturday Evening Post on drugs that help man to
achieve an experience of self-transcendence has, you know, created quite
a stir. We do not read The Satmd'ay Evening Post here in the monastery,
but a good lady sent me a copy of your article, together with a copy
ofa letter she sent to you advising you to read Fr. Garrigon Lagrange on
contemplation. May God preserve you from such a fate.

I am in no position to dispute what you say about the effect of
drugs. Though occasionally fortified by aspirin, and exhilarated by coffee,
and even sometimes using a barbiturate to get to sleep (alas), I have no
experience 0fthe things you speak of. Perhaps I shall make a trial ofthem
one ofthese days, so that I will know what I am talking about. But since I
feel, as you do, that this is a matter which merits discussion and study,
I would like to put forward the things that occur to me after my first
encounter with the subject. I hope by this to [earn rather than to teach
and I can see that this is your attitude also. Therefore, if you will
permit me, I would like to take up the implicit invitation you expressed
in the article, and invite you still further, if you are interested,
to go into this with us. Ifyou are ever in this neighborhood perhaps
you could come here and we could talk at leisure. Our mutual friends,
Victor Hammer and his wife at Lexington, would gladly bring you over.

After this preamble, here are the questions I would like to raise：

1. Are you not endangering the whole concept of genuine mystical experience
in saying that it is something that can be “produced” by a drug?

I know, you qualify the statement, you say that a drug can induce a state
in which mystical experience can be occasioned： a drug can remove
obstacles in our ordinary everyday state of mind, and make a kind of
latent mysticism come to the surface. But I wonder ifthis accords with
the real nature of mystical experience?

I think this point must be studied carefully, and I suggest the following：

2. Ought we not to distinguish between an experience which is essentially
aesthetic and natuml from an experience which is mystical and supernatmy]? I
would call aesthetic and natural an experience which would be an intuitive
“tasting” ofthe inner spirituality ofour own being-ofan intuition of
being as such, arrived at through an intuitive awareness of our own inmost
reality. This would be an experience of “oneness” within oneselfand
with all beings, a flash ofawareness ofthe transcendent reality that is
within all that is real. This sort of thing “happens” to one in all
sorts of ways and I see no reason why it should not be occasioned to
the use of a drug. This intuition is very like the aesthetic intuition
that precedes the creation ofa work ofart. It is like the intuition
of a philosopher who rises above his concepts and their synthesis to
see everything at one glance, in all its length, height, breadth and
depth. It is like the intuition ofa person who has participated deeply
in a liturgical act. (I think you take too cavalier an attitude toward
liturgy, although I confess that I am irked by liturgical enthusiasts
when they want to regiment others into their way of thinking.) By the
way, though I call this experience “natural,” that does not preclude
its being produced by the action of God’s grace (a term that must be
used with care). But I mean that it is not in its mode or in its content
beyond the capacities of human nature itself. Please forgive me for glibly
using this distinction between natural and supernatural as ifI were quite
sure where the dividing line came. Of course I am not. What would I call
a supernatural and mystical experience, then.> I speak very hesitantly,
and do not claim to be an authority. What I say may be very misleading. It
may be the product of subjective and sentimental illusion or it may be
the product of a rationalization superimposed on the experience described
above. Anyway, here goes.

It seems to me that a fully mystical experience has in its very essence
some note ofa direct spiritual contact oftwo liberties, a kind ofa flash
or spark which ignites an intuition of all that has been said above,
plm something much more which I can only describe as “personal,” in
which God is known not as an "object" or as “Him up there” or “Him
in everything" nor as “the All" but -- as the biblical expression --
I AM, or simply AM. But what I mean is that this is not the kind of
intuition that smacks of anything procurable because it is a presence
of a Person and depends on the liberty ofthat Person. And lacking the
element ofa free gift, a free act of love on the part of Him Who comes,
the experience would lose its specifically mystical quality.

3. But now, from the moment that such an experience can be conceived
of as dependent on and inevitably followingfrom the casual use of a
material instrument, it loses the quality of spontaneity and freedom and
transcendence which makes it truly mystical.

This then is my main question. It seems to me that for this reason,
expressed lamely perhaps and without full understanding, real mystical
experience would be more or less incompatible with the eonsu'tent use of
a drug.

Here are some further thoughts： Supposing a person with a genuine vocation
to mystical union. And supposing that person starts to use a drug. And
supposing further that I am correct in the above estimate of what real
mystical experience consists in： then the one using the drug can produce
what I have called a “natural and aesthetic" experience. But at the same
time his higher “conscience” (here I mean not merely a moral censor
but his inmost spirit in its function of “judge” between what is real
and what isn’t) will inevitably reproach him for self-delusion. He
will enjoy the experience for a moment, but it will be followed, not
by the inner permanent strengthening of a real spiritual experience,
but by lassitude, discouragement, confusion, and an increased needfor
the drug. This will produce a vicious circle of repeated use of the drug,
renewed lassitude and guilt, greater need for the drug, and final complete
addiction with the complete ruin ofa mystical vocation, ifnot worse.

What I say here is based on suppositions, ofcourse. I do not attempt
to impose the analysis on you, but I would be very interested in your
judgment of what I have said and your opinion in the matter.

I will not weary you by prolonging this letter, but will close here in
the hope that we can go further into the matter later on.

May I add that I am interested in yoga and above all in Zen, which I find
to be the finest example ofa technique leading to the highest natural
perfection of man's contemplative liberty. You may argue that the use ofa
koan to dispose one for satori is not different from the use ofa drug. I
would like to submit that there is all the difference in the world, and
perhaps we can speak more of this later. My dear Mr. Huxley, it is a joy
to write to you of these things. I hope you can reply. God bless you.
