---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: XXXVIII
    Page: 71
Title: How and why that short prayer pierceth heaven
---
And why pierceth it heaven, this little short prayer of one little
syllable? Surely because it is prayed with a full spirit, in the height and
in the deepness, in the length and in the breadth of his spirit that prayeth
it. In the height it is, for it is with all the might of the spirit. In
the deepness it is, for in this little syllable be contained all the wits
of the spirit. In the length it is, for might it ever feel as it feeleth,
ever would it cry as it cryeth. In the breadth it is, for it willeth the
same to all other that it willeth to itself.

In this time it is that a soul hath comprehended after the lesson of Saint Paul
with all saints -- not fully, but in manner and in part, as it is according
unto this work -- which is the length and the breadth, the height and the
deepness of everlasting and all-lovely, almighty, and all-witting God. The
everlastingness of God is His length. His love is His breadth. His might is
His height. And His wisdom is His deepness. No wonder though a soul that is
thus nigh conformed by grace to the image and the likeness of God his maker,
be soon heard of God! Yea, though it be a full sinful soul, the which is to
God as it were an enemy; an he might through grace come for to cry such a
little syllable in the height and the deepness, the length and the breadth
of his spirit, yet he should for the hideous noise of his cry be always
heard and helped of God.

See by ensample. He that is thy deadly enemy, an thou hear him so afraid
that he cry in the height of his spirit this little word “fire,” or
this word “out”; yet without any beholding to him for he is thine enemy,
but for pure pity in thine heart stirred and raised with the dolefulness of
this cry, thou risest up -- yea, though it be about midwinter’s night --
and helpest him to slack his fire, or for to still him and rest him in his
distress. Oh, Lord! since a man may be made so merciful in grace, to have
so much mercy and so much pity of his enemy, notwithstanding his enmity,
what pity and what mercy shall God have then of a ghostly cry in soul, made
and wrought in the height and the deepness, the length and the breadth of
his spirit; the which hath all by nature that man hath by grace? And much
more, surely without comparison, much more mercy will He have; since it is,
that that thing that is so had by nature is nearer to an eternal thing than
that which is had by grace.
