---
By: Vishakhadatta
Source:
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "4 - \u4DC3 - Meng"
    Line: 2
    Page: 29-31
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
---
CHANDRAGUPTA. And why did they desert me?

CHANAKYA. Bhadrabhata and Purushadatta are notorious whorers and drinkers;
the first preferred women to elephants, the second liked wine more than
horses; they were dismissed and given a subsistence allowance, which it seems
they didn't appreciate. They are now in charge of Malayaketu's elephants
and horses. Dingarata and Balagupta were after more money -- and it seems
Malayaketu would pay them better than Your Majesty. Your boyhood servant
couldn't stand the strain of too many favors from you; he feared a slump, and
Malayaketu seems to have assured him a more balanced regimen. Bhagurayana first
frightened Malayaketu out of here by saying I had assassinated Malayaketu's
father, then fell under the influence of Chandanadasa and his conspirators,
then realized things were too hot for him here; he scuttled to safety with
Malayaketu. Malayaketu made him his minister out of gratitude. Rohitaksha
and Vijayavarman were jealous; they couldn't endure the granting of favors
to Your Majesty's relatives, and they fled.

CHANDRAGUPTA. If you knew all this beforehand, why didn't you take
appropriate measures?

CHANAKYA. No action was possible under the circumstances.

CHANDRAGUPTA. You mean you were either weak or had a deeper plan.

CHANAKYA. A minister cannot afford to be weak, Your Majesty.

CHANDRAGUPTA. What was the plan then?

CHANAKYA. A plan that must be not only heard but understood and
appreciated. There are only two ways to deal with dissatisfied officials --
humor them or punish them. Humoring Bhadrabhata and Purushadatta was out of
question： it would have meant reinstating them in positions of dangerous
authority. If the elephants and horses fall into unreliable hands, the defense
of the kingdom becomes shaky. Humoring Dingarata and Balagupta would have
been an even greater headache; their voluptuous greed is so great that giving
them a whole kingdom wouldn't satisfy them. Rajasena and Bhagurayana were
so fearful of losing all they had that there was no point in humoring them,
and the same went for the jealous Rohitaksha and Vijayavarman. As for the
other alternative -- punishing them -- I didn't think it advisable. We
have just defeated the Nandas, the people are still uneasy -- why stir
up more trouble by punishing prominent men? Besides, Malayaketu, with
Rakshasa's help, is poised to attack us; the Mleccha army is with him,
he is infuriated with the assassination of his father. I thought it best,
Your Majesty, to let these men escape. ...

CHANDRAGUPTA. ... why weren't effective measures taken to prevent Malayaketu
from escaping and making trouble for us now?

CHANAKYA. There are two alternatives, Your Majesty. We could have put him in
prison; or we could have honored our promise to give him half the kingdom.
If we imprison him, think what the people would suspect -- first we murder
the father, then we imprison the son. We would look like barbarians. But if
we give him half the kingdom, we destroy the very purpose of assassinating
Parvataka, for the assassination of Parvataka was ordered with the aim of
getting his kingdom. So I let Malayaketu escape.

CHANDRAGUPTA. It sounds logical. But why did you let Rakshasa escape?

CHANAKYA. The people respect him. They admire his loyalty and devotion to
Nanda. Had he stayed in the city, in prison or out, plots galore would have
cropped up, money would have poured in, cells and conspiracies would have
festered. Now he can sting us only from the outside, and I can handle him
more comfortably.

CHANDRAGUPTA. Couldn't a brave show of force have settled him?

CHANAKYA. Force against a demon like Rakshasa? Yes, and how many men would we
lose before we secured him? Besides, there would be no certainty -- he might
prefer suicide to falling into our hands. And then the loss would be all
ours, a first-class brain and a loyal heart gone forever. No, Your Majesty,
he has to be tamed as a wild elephant is tamed -- with gentle cunning.
