---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "8 - ䷇ - Pi"
    Line: 6
    Page: 62-63
By: Katherine Mansfield
---
At that moment the boss noticed that a fly had fallen into his broad inkpot,
and was trying feebly but desperately to clamber out again. Help! help! said
those struggling legs. But the sides of the inkpot were wet and slippery;
it fell back again and began to swim. The boss took up a pen, picked the
fly out of the ink, and shook it on to a piece of blotting paper. For
a fraction of a second it lay still on the dark patch that oozed round
it. Then the front legs waved, took hold, and, pulling its small sodden
body up it began the immense task of cleaning the ink from its wings. Over
and under, over and under, went a leg along a wing, as the stone goes over
and under the scythe. Then there was a pause, while the fly, seeming to
stand on the tips of its toes, tried to expand first one wing and then the
other. It succeeded at last, and, sitting down, it began, like a minute
cat, to clean its face. Now one could imagine that the little front legs
rubbed against each other lightly, joyfully. The horrible danger was over;
it had escaped; it was ready for life again.

But just then the boss had an idea. He plunged his pen back into the ink,
leaned his thick wrist on the blotting paper, and as the fly tried its
wings down came a great blot. What would it make of that? What indeed! The
little beggar seemed absolutely cowed, stunned, and afraid to move because
of what would happen next. But then, as if painfully, it dragged itself
forward. The front legs waved, caught hold, and, more slowly this time,
the task began from the beginning.

He’s a plucky little devil, thought the boss, and he felt a real
admiration for the fly’s courage. That was the way to tackle things;
that was the right spirit. Never say die; it was only a question of ...
But the fly had again finished its laborious task, and the boss had
just time to refill his pen, to shake fair and square on the new-cleansed
body yet another dark drop. What about it this time? A painful moment of
suspense followed. But behold, the front legs were again waving; the boss
felt a rush of relief. He leaned over the fly and said to it tenderly,
“You artful little b. ... ” And he actually had the brilliant notion
of breathing on it to help the drying process. All the same, there was
something timid and weak about its efforts now, and the boss decided that
this time should be the last, as he dipped the pen into the inkpot.

It was. The last blot fell on the soaked blotting-paper, and the draggled
fly lay in it and did not stir. The black legs were stuck to the body;
the front legs were not to be seen.

"Come on,” said the boss. “Look sharp!” And he stirred it with his
pen -- in vain. Nothing happened or was likely to happen. The fly was dead.
