---
By: Aldous Huxley
Source:
  Title: Don Giovanni and the Universe： Aldous Huxley on How the Moon
    Illuminates the Complementarity of Spirituality and Science
  URL: "https://www.brainpickings.org/2017/05/16/\
    meditation-on-the-moon-aldous-huxley-music-at-night/"
  Date: 2017-05-17 09:58 PT
  Source:
    Title: Music at Night
    By: Aldous Huxley
  By: Maria Popova
---
Materialism and mentalism -- the philosophies of “nothing but.” How wearily
familiar we have become with that “nothing but space, time, matter and motion,”
that “nothing but sex,” that “nothing but economics”! And the no less
intolerant “nothing but spirit,” “nothing but consciousness,” “nothing but
psychology” -- how boring and and tiresome they also are! “Nothing but”  ...
lacks generosity. Enough of “nothing but.” It is time to say again, with
primitive common sense (but for better reasons), “not only, but also.”

[ ... ]

Outside my window the night is struggling to wake; in the moonlight, the
blinded garden dreams so vividly of its lost colours that the black roses are
almost crimson, the trees stand expectantly on the verge of living greenness.
The white-washed parapet of the terrace is brilliant against the dark blue
sky. ...  The white walls of the house coldly reverberate the lunar
radiance. ... The moon is full. And not only full, but also beautiful. And not
only beautiful, but also ...

Socrates was accused by his enemies of having affirmed, heretically, that the
moon was a stone. He denied the accusation. All men, said he, know that the
moon is a god, and he agreed with all men. As an answer to the materialistic
philosophy of “nothing but” his retort was sensible and even scientific. More
sensible and scientific, for instance, than the retort invented by D.H.
Lawrence [in Fantasia of the Unconscious]. “The moon,” writes Lawrence,
“certainly isn’t a snowy cold world, like a world of our own gone cold.
Nonsense. It is a globe of dynamic substance, like radium or phosphorus,
coagulated upon a vivid pole of energy.” The defect of this statement is that
it happens to be demonstrably untrue. The moon is quite certainly not made of
radium or phosphorus. The moon is, materially, “a stone.” Lawrence was angry
(and he did well to be angry) with the nothing-but philosophers who insist that
the moon is only a stone. He knew that it was something more; he had the
empirical certainty of its deep significance and importance. But he tried to
explain this empirically established fact of its significance in the wrong
terms -- in terms of matter and not of spirit. To say that the moon is made of
radium is nonsense. But to say, with Socrates, that it is made of god-stuff is
strictly accurate. For there is nothing, of course, to prevent the moon from
being both a stone and a god.

[ ... ]

Numinous feelings are the original god-stuff, from which the theory-making mind
extracts the individualized gods of the pantheons, the various attributes of
the One.

[ ... ]

The moon is a stone; but it is a highly numinous stone. Or, to be more precise,
it is a stone about which and because of which men and women have numinous
feelings. Thus, there is a soft moonlight that can give us the peace that
passes understanding. There is a moonlight that inspires a kind of awe. There
is a cold and austere moonlight that tells the soul of its loneliness and
desperate isolation, its insignificance or its uncleanness. There is an amorous
moonlight prompting to love -- to love not only for an individual but sometimes
even for the whole universe.

[ ... ]

There the stone is -- stony. You cannot think about it for long without finding
yourself invaded by one or other of several essential numinous sentiments.
These sentiments belong to one or other of two contrasted and complementary
groups. The name of the first family is Sentiments of Human Insignificance, of
the second, Sentiments of Human Greatness.

[ ... ]

The universe throws down a challenge to the human spirit; in spite of his
insignificance and abjection, man has taken it up. The stone glares down at us
out of the black boundlessness, a memento mori. But the fact that we know it
for a memento mori justifies us in feeling a certain human pride. We have a
right to our moods of sober exultation.
