---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 459
  Source:
    Title: Qur’ân
    Locus: II 8-12
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Powers of Darkness
  - 423
References:
  - Body: |
      There is a great brotherhood throughout the world who have been
      working for peace for thousands of years. They are back of every
      movement for world peace and are becoming stronger and stronger all
      the time.  There are now about 216 groups throughout the world. There
      is always one central unit as a first or centralizing body, and twelve
      units which surround that unit, giving it more force and power. They
      are working also for the enlightenment of the whole world. ...

      There are many misconceptions regarding the White Brotherhood. It must
      first be understood that they never make themselves known as such. ...
      There will come a time, however, when they will work more openly, but
      that will be when there are enough illumined people to know and
      understand just what they are doing. ...

      If all the financial world were to get behind this movement for unity
      it would be the greatest influence for peace. ... If the cooperative
      system should be adopted universally, there could be no booms and no
      more depressions. It would also be of great influence in the abolition
      of war. As a matter of fact, cooperation is coming into existence. The
      people who do not cooperate and align themselves with the new order
      will be outlawed completely ... ' (cp. Rev. XIII. 17).

      This life of oneness is the life of the masters, and anyone may live
      that life if he will drop his alliances with institutions and
      religions and races and nations and accept his alliance with the
      Universe. This is the “ark of the covenant” which enabled the Children
      of Israel to succeed, but when it was lost they failed to gain their
      liberty from opposition.
    Source: Baird T. Spalding： op. cit., vol. IV, pp. 8, 11, 14, 203
---
And of mankind are some who say： We believe in Allâh and the Last
Day, when they believe not.

They think to beguile Allâh and those who believe, and they beguile
none save themselves; but they perceive not.

In their hearts is a disease, and Allâh increaseth their disease. A
painful doom is theirs because they lie.

And when it is said unto them： Make not mischief in the earth, they
say： Wp are peacemakers only.

Are not they indeed the mischief-makers? But they perceive not.
