---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: 13 - ䷌ - T'ung Jen
    Line: 5
    Page: 98-101
By: Jules Romains
Format: mixed
References:
  - By: Horace
    Title: Odes
    Locus:
      Book: III
      Ode: iii
      Line: 7
---
The frightful thing about war is that, as a subject, it’s inexhaustible.
One’s eye is always being caught by some new aspect of the business. My
real point is this： that for the men in the trenches -- for all of them,
that is, who are above the purely animal level, for whom, as you must see
for yourself, it is most necessary to find an explanation -- the idea that
they must stay where they are and get on with their job because there is
no real alternative is not enough to keep them in spirits, to prevent
their moral collapse. Each one of them has got to find some effective
suggestion that will touch him personally, some thought, some fixed idea,
the secret of which is known to him alone, the essence of which he can
absorb drop by drop. Sometimes he has several among which he can take
his choice. No sooner does one begin to lose its potency than he can
change over to others. Take my own case, for instance. For quite a while I
managed very comfortably on the idea that I was the kind of man who could
“rise superior to circumstances” the circumstances in question being
partly composed of mental distress, partly of bodily discomfort. “I’d
like,” said I, “to see those circumstances to which I could not rise
superior!” While shrapnel pattered round me ... I would recite to myself
like a sort of magic formula, those terrific lines of Horace：

  Si fractus illabatur orbis
  Impavidum ferient ruinae ...

  [ If the world should break and fall on him,
    it would strike him fearless. ]

It really is a magic formula. And then, one day, it no longer worked. My
mental distress became too great, my fear became too great, and I just
wanted to burst into tears and cry “Mama!” like a little boy. ... Then
take the young second lieutenant fresh from SaintCyr, all innocence
and splendid bravery, who says to himself： “If France is conquered,
life will be impossible. I shall feel personally dishonoured. Far rather
would I have my name on a headstone with the words： ’Died on the field
of honour,’ than live on disgraced.” Another example is that of the
reservist with a taste for serious reading and an equipment of large-hearted
ideals, the kind of man who says to himself： “This is the war that will
end war. We are bringing peace to the whole world. Thanks to our sacrifice,
our children will be spared knowledge of such horrors.” Standing next
to him in the same trench will be some fellow who thinks： “This is
the end of the world. We’re all in for it. What does it matter ifI get
killed a little sooner or a little later?” Another there may be who
believes in a coming reign of justice, who is still convinced that victory
for the democracies will mean freedom for the oppressed everywhere in the
world, the end of the domination of money and social iniquity, who would
be willing even to die if only he could be sure that his death would mean
greater happiness for men yet unborn. Then there’s the sentimentalist,
for whom nothing counts but personal relationships, whose world is made up
of just a few dear friends, who argues： “Most of my pals are dead. If
they all go, what is there left to live for?” There’s the man whose
wife left him as soon as he was called up, and ran off with someone else;
who gets no letters and no parcels; who feels himself too old to start
life afresh, who would just as soon be dead, for whom the very fact of
danger is a distraction, because it gives him the illusion that life
is still sweet. There is the man who exists in a world of dreams and
takes things as they come. “Everything is predestined,” says he;
“1 always knew it. No use fighting against fate. We must just go with
the tide.” There is the man who never had a chance, who has always felt
himself to be the victim of injustice and insult, who has always envied
the good fortune of others, who so relishes the taste of equality bred of
a general misery that he pays but lip service to the desire for peace with
all the bitterness that it will bring for him in its train. Close beside
him is another in whom the war has waked a deep-seated strain of pessimism,
who thinks sincerely： “The universe is a foul absurdity. It was always
pretty obvious, but the war has proved it beyond the shadow of a doubt. Why
cling to a foul absurdity?” or： “Humanity is the work of the Devil,
a blot on the face of the earth, born for murder and self-slaughter. So
much the worse for humanity (and for me, who am part of humanity and
so of the whole putrescent mess).” There is the fanatical Catholic,
who thinks： “This is God’s punishment wrought on a corrupt and
faithless generation. If God has decided that I too must pay the penalty,
even for the faults of others, who am I to question His will?” There is
the gentle Catholic, who carries tucked away in his pack a tiny edition of
the Imitation, who, when night falls, says his prayers in his shellhole,
very quietly, so that no one shall notice him, and murmurs： “Let
me suffer, as You suffered, Jesu mine. Why should I be spared, since
You suffered a thousand deaths hanging on Your cross? Give me strength
that I may be not too unworthy of You.” Finally, there is the Man ...
who says： “All that matters to me in this world is the language
of France, the cathedrals of our French countryside, the quays of the
Seine, landscapes that can be found nowhere else in the world, a way of
life that is unique. If all that is to be taken away, life has no longer
any point. If, by dying, I can ensure that all these things will live
on after me, then death is right and proper. ... ” Picture to yourself
trench after trench filled with men thinking such thoughts, and you will
find the answer to your question. ... That is why Verdun still stands.
