---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 397
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Holy War=Killing the Inward Dragon
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Hold of Passion
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
By: St Gregory of Sinai
---
We must suppose that those who secretly wrestle with us abide in
another great world which, in its nature, is akin to the natural
powers of our soul. For the three princes of evil, in their fight with
spiritual strugglers, attack the three powers of our soul, and if a
man has failed in something or does not strive at something, they
overcome him in this very thing. Thus, the dragon -- the prince of
the abyss -- rises in arms against those who keep attention on their
heart, as one whose ‘strength is in his loins, and his force is in the
navel of his belly’ (Job xl. 16). He sends the lust-loving giant of
forgetfulness against them with his clouds of fiery arrows, stirs up
lust in them like some turbulent sea, makes it foam and bum in them
and causes their confusion by flooding them with torrents of
insatiable passions. The prince of this world, who is in charge of
warfare against the excitable part, attacks those who follow the path
of active virtue. Using the giant of laziness, he encompasses them
with all kinds of witchery of the passions and wrestles with those who
always put up a courageous resistance. Thus he either vanquishes or is
himself vanquished and so he gains them either crowns or shame before
the faces of the angels. The prince of high places attacks those who
exercise themselves in mental contemplation, by offering them
fantasies; for, in company with the spiritual wickedness in high
places, his task is to affect the thinking and speaking part. Using
the giant of ignorance, he brings confusion into the thought striving
to rise on high, darkens and frightens it, introducing into it vague
fantastic images of spirits and their metamorphoses and producing
phantoms of lightning and thunder, tempests and earthquakes. Thus each
of the three princes, impinging upon the corresponding powers of the
soul, wages war against it, conducting his attacks against the
particular part allotted to him.
