---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 1015-1016
Tags:
  - 1013
  - 512
  - 48
  - 317
  - 237
  - 775
  - 835
By: Boehme
---
Know, therefore, that the confusion of tongues is born of the multiplicity
of beliefs, and that nearly all nations are formed from particular opinions
concerning the being and will of God; and herein lies the confusion, that
is to say, the mystery of Babylon the Great. ...

In preaching union, therefore, we can counsel nothing better than the desire
to be again one in one, one single nation, one single tree, one single man,
one single soul and one single body. We must destroy and kill in ourselves
all the images of the letters, letting but a single one live, no longer
desiring to know or to will anything of God but to live uniquely and simply
according to what God wishes to know in and through us, so that we immerse
without any other knowing the hunger and desire of our souls into the five
vowels. And therein is to be found the great and holy name of God, Jehovah
or Jesus (insofar as living Word which gives life to all things), and not
by following the property of nature, the distinction of multiple wills;
but it is in the unique sun of love that He is revealed.

Just as the outward sun gives light and strength to the whole world; in
the same way this unique name in its power gives life and meaning to all
letters. ...

When the time of the outward constellation is accomplished, then the Tower
of Babel, viz, the outward man including his opinion, is overthrown and
destroyed in confusion, excepting the unique soul which stands before God,
naked and destitute of all.

Hence there is no issue unless this soul possesses the unique spirit of the
sonant letters, namely, the unformed Word, so that it is enabled in its desire
to draw this to itself and put it on, in such way as to make fly apart the
language that is seized and compacted, and all the images of the letters,
and to introduce them into one tongue and one unique will which is God, all
in all. All must return to the One which is the All, for in multiplicity there.
