---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Awakening the Great Mother=Kuan Yin
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 247-
  Source:
    Title:
By:
Title: Some Manifestations
Format: mixed
References:
  - Title: Lotus Sutra
---
\  To hear her name and see her form
  Delivers beings from every woe.
  -- Lotus Sutra

The emhassy olithe boat-women to Kuan Yin‘s temple well exemplifies how
peasants in (Ihina and neighbouring countries conceive of her. Seeing her
as a l)(‘HC\t)lc’nI goddess into whose nature it would he discourteous
to enquire, they reioicc hecause she is lovely in herself and generous in
heeding supplit'ations. This 11neomplicated attitude is not litnited to
illiterate followers of ancient tiilk/religions, for even among the general
r1111 ol Buddhists in China and Japan, the distinction hetween deities
and celestial )’()dhis‘attyas‘ is lilurred, l loweyer, more erudite
Buddhists see her otherwise. The ttiillowing atcount ol‘an eiqierience
significant to me personally preliaces two other stones that will serve as a
preyiew of some of the ways in which Kuan Yin is 1onceptualised. ()ne, though
it does just touch upon the Mind ()nly doctrine lying at the root of the
celestial Bodhisattva concept, reveals her in a guise \ery similar to that
ol‘a goddess, whereas the other carries us to a high metaphysical level.

One ol the three main annual festivals 01‘ Kuan Yin, Hearer-of-(tries,
lalls on the nineteenth day olithe sixth lunar month (about July). For
centuries it has heen celehrated hy gatherings in her honour, some of
which assemble on lllt twelltlt ol the month and spend no less than seven
days on rites and «oiitrnmlauw meditation centred on Kuan Yin. Alas, in
recent years the I.ll]l\\ ot her lollowers have been thinned. For all I
know" such lc‘istiyals still talu' plao 111 Japan, Korea and Singapore,
but hardly in (Thina or \'iet-\1'am.

(J1me soon .iltt-i my arri\al in China, while staying at a
monastery 11w~1l111g.1111ongilumlisol lythee trees on the sunny
side of a minor sacred litil ."\ \il \\1'l\‘ll‘\ W111111131111.l
111.1111：that"l\11.111\1n\l‘»'11‘[l1d.1\"\\as going to lie celebrated
that c 11111; .11 .a 111 1;l1l1ou[1n：; [ciiiple oxer \\ hich she presided,
so at sunset 1 set 1111 11111111direction, lw‘\ the nine l .1rri\ ed,
night had tallen. Scudding clotitlt Hl‘wlllttl [ht moon, hut peach
shaped lanterns suspended trom the temple ;.1[e\\.1\\ ele;.1n[l\ cur\1n;;
rooli cast .1 pool ot crimson light that could he setn [tom .1 distance
lx‘eyond lay .1 courtyard [hronged with worshippers \\ host [act's \\
et‘e illumined liy the rays ot perhaps a hundred candles stream111;
[hioueh [heshrine»h.1ll‘s \\ide»tlung doors. Most were lay-people,
but a sliii‘inlxhne ot lxild pates \ho\\ ed that some monks and nuns from
neighbouring 111on.1s[er1es \\’ere.1mong them. ;\ll \yere craning their
heads towards the slum. 11 here l\‘u.1n link statue rose heliind .1 la\
ishly carved and gilded altar \\l1eie stood innumeralile c.111dle~st1cl\'s,
a great liron/e incense tripod and an .11 1.1\ or porcelain \essels
piled \\ 1th otterings otitruit and flowers. No animal tlesh oi cup or
\\1[1L‘ \\ c rc to lie seen, tor e\ e11 the peasants had some inkling
ot the [litterence l‘et\\een l\‘11.1n tin and the more gluttonous
local deities; liesides, the keepers ot the shrine \\ould haye rejected
such offerings; as impure and displeasine to the ls‘odhisatnaithough
not monks, they would hardly ham accepted [hem exen tor themselves.

The night air, drenched \\ith the mingled perfumes of burning sandal\\
ood and ot iasmine and champak flowers, quhered as the mallet thudded upon
.1 large hollou ed lilocl; known as the wooden-fish drum; its [limb was
punctuated by the clang and Illilx‘lc otbronze and silver instruments
used to mark the rhythm ot the chant. Though the same few words. Namzl
tutti? 111» [1：1 [(11.11) Mir/2' Yin P111754 1Homage to the greatly
ctimpassionate, greatly mercitul lx'uan Shih Yin l1"odlii\;1tt\a).' were
intoned repeatedly, the ardour of those taking part and frequent subtle
changes in the rhythm dispelled monotony.sotli;1[ the music litted me
into a realm of beauty and enchantment.

Taller than the \Viry southerners pressing all about me, I had an unol
structed \ ie\\'. The li’odhisattya was depicted as a gracious young lady
with smoothly rounded cheeks and chin, sitting \‘ery initiirmally upon a
rock-like throne, one knee raised so high that the elegant little slipper
peeping from lieneath her rolie was on a le\ el with the other knee. ()ne
slender hand toyed with a willow sprig, the other held a Vase of "sweet dew"
symbolising the nectar ot compassion. To either side, wrought on a smaller
scale, stood her attendants -- -r Shan Tsiai, a smilingy boy, and Luner Nu",
the Dragon \AIaiden, who was holding out a giant pearl. These statues can
hardly have been the work ot local artists; they \yere finely sculpted and
had a pleasing li\'eliness. [hon-：11 I could l1.1\t wished them less
ornate. But for her distinctive posture and the nature otthe sy mliols
in her hands, the splendidly robed and beieW' elled [igurt tould almost
hayc lieen mistaken for that oti\.1ary arrayed 115 (\)11L'(‘Ill)i l leay
en 111 the manner oi South Europe. Superticially at least, hCF robes and
ornaments I<\tlttltletl artilaets lrom i’y/‘antium. Struik by this la\
1in tostuiue, I wondered how this eiuprt ss like being could he made to
tit m with the gently austere teaching olitltt’ Ii’udtlha： lor I had
still to learn that the external lortns taken by Ilutldlusm in dillerent
countries, though \Irllx" ingly \aried, entail no real departures trom
its doctrines.

I’resently a gust of wind sent ineetiseismoke billowing upwards in
heayy clouds that momentarily blurred the Bodhisama's features, creating
the illusion of a li\‘mg being whose expression now altered and took on
unimaginable beauty. As though chiding my churlishness in the matter oli
her costume, she seemed to fix me with her eyes and gently shake her head.

Aware that this was no miracle. I was ne\ertheless entranced and tried
hard to helie\e that the goddess had taken notice ol me, \\'hat is more,
there seemed to hoyer iust beyond the threshold oli my mind a teasing
recollection of something or someone once greatly loy ed but long faded
from my memory. The effect was so poignant that I wanted both to laugh
and to cry. I am convinced that it was this elusiye recollection rather
than the trick wrought by the incense smoke that produced what seems
in retrospect a magical effect; in that moment I conceited a re\'erence
tor the (：tnnp'd'SSltm'dlC One which, far from fading with the years,
was destined to intensity, although for a long time it remained no more
than a pleasant whimsy. In those days I had not the wisdom to reconcile
deep deyotion to a deity with the knowledge that deities are not!

I was too turned to pay attention to what followed. No doubt the long period
of inyocation ga\e place to recitation of the P‘u \rIe‘n chapter oli
the Lotus St'itra or of Kuan Yin's Dha'rrani' of Great Compassion The
rite must have ended with an inspiring crescendo ot‘cymbals and drums
succeeded by an eerie silence as the officiants prostrated themselyes;
but by then I had slipped away to begin my walk through the darkness to
the monastery where I lodged. To this day I recall my pleasure in the cool
night air so free from cloying scents, the creek of bamboosj swaying in the
wind and the scurrying of small creatures in the undergrowth Throughout
the walk I indulged the poetic fancy that the goddess had wished to
remind me of something immensely important to my happiness. Such a mood
is not difficult to sustain while strolling by moonlight on the slopes
of a mountain where immortal beings have been worshipped since before the
dawn of history; the \ery atmosphere is Vibrant with intimations of their
presence. To a part of, my mind which told me I was being absurd, I put up
strenuous resistance, being loath to return to an ugly world which, men in
those days, was tast coming under the domination ol monsters disguised as
inyentors and technicians. II.’t\ iug disposed olit‘m illing logic,
my mind soared, leading me to a state bor» dering on ecstasy. I had a
loretaste olithe wisdom born ol' lull realisation that only mind is real;
the demons ofduality were temporarily vanquished so that it became possible
to entertain simultaneously two opposing facets of truth,

Back at the monastery, while waiting for the sleepy porter to admit me,
I became aware of a delicious fragrance which I supposed to have a super,
natural origin until, looking up, I saw that the gateway was overhung by
[he boughs of a tree called in Chinese yeh-laz'stiang (night fragrance)
which pours out its perfume during the first watches of the night. The
great courtyard was in darkness, the monks being still away celebrating
the festival or else retired to their cells to sleep or meditate until
summoned for the morning rite an hour before dawn. Noticing that lamps
still glimmered in the deserted shrine-hall, I felt a sudden impulse to
enter and make my way round behind the Buddha statues to where it was
customary in Chinese monasteries to house a statue of Kuan Yin. There
she was, standing upon a shelfat about the level ofmy chest. It was an
image of fine bronze some three feet high, with the right hand raised in
benediction, the elongated eyes half closed in contemplative bliss. The
stumps of votive candles still guttered at her feet, whereas the incense
sticks lit in her honour had burnt down to the stubs leaving behind a sour
staleness. It seems sad that deities have to endure this odour when their
worshippers have retired for the night. Perhaps the truth is that it is the
worshippers themselves who enjoy temple offerings. Lighting fresh incense,
I stood before her in silence until, suddenly carried away by exaltation,
I whispered, “Compassionate One, be pleased to speak and convince me
of your reality!”

How foolish this must sound and how ashamed I should be to write of it,
were it not for the sequel. Even with the words upon my lips I reflected
that a sane man should know better than to attempt holding converse with
a statue! Yet perhaps I had some excuse; for, apart from being then in
a special state of mind, I had recently spent much time in the company
of certain Chinese Buddhists who, despite being men ofobvious good sense
and erudition, would have found nothing surprising in such conduct. As
it turned out, no justification was needed, for the plain truth is that
the statue answered me at once, saying： “Look not for my reality in
the realm of appearances or in the Void. Seek it in your own mind. There
only it resides.”

I wish I could make the story even more extraordinary by affirming
that the bronze lips moved, that the beautifully moulded throat gave
forth melodious sounds. It was not so. No sound or movement stirred the
silence. The enigmatic words entered my consciousness as thought-forms,
but so palpably that not even sound itselfcould have made the effect more
electrifying or their sequence more precise. It is hard to believe that,
at a time when my knowledge of Mahayana Buddhism was so slight, I could
have summoned such a pronouncement from within myself. I did not really
know then what the first sentence meant. I felt sure I had received an
intimation that Kuan Yin exists -- to the extent that “exists” is a
fitting description ofher subtle nature. Using the word thus is perhaps
to overstate the case, just as to say that she does not exist would be to
understate it. My experience was not imaginary. Such intuitive perceptions
are too direct, too penetrating to be mistaken for ordinary imaginings. Yet
for years I hesitated to speak of it, except to my Chinese friends,
who understood its nature; but now I have come to recognise that no good
purpose is served by concealing marvels merely because people nowadays are
apt to disbelieve them. In truth, such a marvel is not magical to those who
recognise mind’s sovereign power over phenomena of every kind whatsoever.

  Chrysanthemums are gold
  To those who see them so.
  Red gold is just a metal
  Till thought-forms give it worth.

There is a modern short story about a timid knight who, armed with a
magic word to make him invulnerable, slew fifty dragons as easily as
cockroaches. Unfortunately, while engaged in slaying the fiftieth, he
suddenly realised that he had been tricked by his teacher into putting
faith in a madeup nonsense-word. Needless to say, his fifty-first dragon
gobbled him up in no time at all! Yet can one say that the magic wrought
by his faith in that nonsense-word was not real? It stood him in far better
stead than his “real” armour and “objectively existing” sword!

A British-educated Chinese friend of mine once told me a story that fully
bears out this view of reality.

“As you know, though my mother was a Buddhist, I received all my
pre-university education at Catholic schools, was baptised at sixteen and
later took a Catholic wife. For years I was as devout a convert as could
reasonably be expected ofa man like me, a geologist. Then came the war which
sent so many of us fleeing westward before the Japanese advance. My native
city suffered cruelly from indiscriminate rape and slaughter. I could not
think of my old home without tears. My work for a government prospecting
enterprise took me to some wild and lonely places in Kweichow province
and once I was sent to look for wolfram in a mountainous region six or
seven days walk from the nearest motor-road. One day, an hour before our
usual stop for midday rice, I mistook a mule-track for the path we were
following and wandered far away from the men carrying my luggage and
equipment. Knowing I was lost, but hungry and convinced by occasional
fresh piles of mule dung that the track must lead to human habitations,
I pressed forward. Upward and upward I went until clouds were swirling
about me and I could hear what sounded like the weird cries of gibbons
high up in the trees. At every turn I hoped in vain to come upon at least
a woodsman's hovel, but] had wandered too far by then to feel it wise
to turn back. I needed food and some local man to guide me to where my
porters were likely to be found.

“An icy wind came tearing down from the high peaks and dusk was closing
in. Eerie sounds were all about me, some recognisable as the voices of
wind and stream, others inexplicable and mournful as the cries of wandering
ghosts. With each step I grew more afraid and the mists swirling among the
rocks grew denser and more opaque. Fears of wild beasts rose to haunt me;
as for bandits, of whom the local people had told me sinister tales,l longed
to meet a fellow-human being, bandit or not. At last terror brought me to
my knees beside the path and, teeth chattering, I poured out a prayer to
my patron saint, St. Bernadette, begging that sweet child (as I thought of
her) to appear and lead me to a place of safety. By what light remained,
my eyes sought for her among the rocks. I believed that if she did not
come, I should lose my sanity, if not my life!

“Then she was there, standing on a small flat rock, her flimsy blue robe
hardly ruffled by the fierce and bitterly cold wind. She was smiling, asI
could see well, for around her glowed a nimbus of soft light. Graduallyl
took in that there was something unexpected about her face. Then I
realised what it was-she was a Chinese Bernadette! Her high-swept hair,
the jewelled ornaments clasped about her throat, the white silk trousers
peeping through a blue robe slit to the thigh were those of a noble
Chinese maiden many centuries ago.

“‘Come, Elder Brother,’ she said, speaking melodious Mandarin in a
childish voice too young to have belonged to Bernadette even at the time
of her first meeting with the Holy Virgin, ‘I shall show you a place
where you can rest safely and tomorrow all will be very well.’

“She led me a short distance to a shallow cave well protected from the
wind. Its floor was as soft as the softest of beds and I am nearly sure I
caught sight ofa silken paw/0 (quilt) stuffed no doubt with warm silk-floss,
just as I fell asleep in the very act oflying down at her command.

“The next day I awoke, after a long, deep sleep, to find the sun high
in the sky. There was no sign of bedding and the floor of the cave, far
from being soft, was rugged and strewn with pebbles, but I had slept as
well and warmly as in the room I once shared with my mother in my beloved
native place, now a thousand Ii away. While I was washing in a nearby
stream, a train of mules came down the track, driven by three mounted
[of-u. I easily persuaded one of these mule-drivers to sell me some cold
steamed bread” -he would have given it without payment, I am sure --
and, with his help, I was able to rejoin my party by noon the following day.

“For more than a year I believed I had been saved by St. Bernadette,
though I could not account for her extreme youthfulness and Chinese
appearance. Then, one day, I happened to take shelter from the rain in a
disused temple not far from Chengtu and there, in a small chapel, I came
upon a faded fresco showing Kuan Yin clad in a simple robe of blue cotton
without her usual ornaments. Seated by the ocean, she was attended as
usual by Shan Ts'ai and Lung Nu". In great astonishment, I recognised in
Lung Nu" my ‘Bernadette’! Even the blue dress and white trousers were
the same, but now there were no jewels clasped about her throat. Thinking
about those jewels roused a memory ofa similar picture that used to hang
in my mother’s bedroom, showing both Kuan Yin and Lung Nu" adorned with
splendid ornaments. So that was it! You could say that the lady who saved
my life on that freezing night was neither Bernadette nor Lung Nu", just
a childhood memory lighting up a fear-crazed mind. And you would be right
-- partly! Still, childish memories do not guide people to unknown caves,
make rocks and pebbles become fine mattresses, conjure pei-wos from the
air or drive away deadly cold.

“Yes, in a way you would be right. It was that memory. It was also Lung
Nu" herself, sent out of pity by Kuan Yin. Having since then studied
the profound Mahayana doctrine of Mind Only, I accept no contradiction
between those two. Driven to the edge ofa reason, I sought divine aid,
and divine aid came instantly-in a form that accorded with the contents
of my mind. It was as a mental apparition that Lung Nu" appeared and
brought from my mind the warmth and comfort that made me physically
able to withstand great cold. Would you dare say that was not a miracle
wrought by the Bodhisattva I had worshipped as a child? All miracles
are so -- working through mind. True, the Bodhisattva did not come
herself. Having too much delicacy to appear before someone calling on a
foreign goddess, she sent Lung Nu" who could be taken for the child saint
I was expecting. Attributing my good fortune to the marvellous workings
of my own mind and accepting it as the intervention of the Bodhisattva
are two ways of expressing the same truth."

I have often pondered on the mineralogist’s wisdom-opening
experience. I-Iis penetrating understanding ofit explains many similar
occurrences, bridging the gap between magical and psychological. Years
later, I chanced to hear -- at second hand -- another story, different in
purport, but also illus[rating the identity of miraculous intervention from
"within" and "without" the mind. To understand what the narrator tells us,
one must know that, whereas Kuan Yin, though often depicted as a member of
a trinity with the celestial Buddha Amita‘bha in the centre and Kuan Yin
and Ta Shih-Chih Bodhisattias standing on either hand, is also worshipped
independently by millions, this is not the case with Ta Shih-Chih. The
latter seems to have faded from human consciousness, being rarely invoked
in his own right 1 am told the narrator was a very old gentleman called
Mr. Ch’e‘n, who had spent the last forty years of his life as a recluse.

“In my young days, preparing for the imperial civil service examinations
was, for cultivated youths, the most important thing in life. Everything
depended on success -- not just rank and wealth, but the honour brought
to one‘s family and the power to serve society effectively. You cannot
imagine how hard we used to work at the ancient classics, straining our
eyes through reading late into the night by the pitiful glimmer of a wick
floating in a saucer of oil. No wonder so many of us became stooped early
in life~ with all that poring over books! For me and my four brothers it
was especially bad. My father, who loved the Buddhist sutras even more than
the Confucian classics, made us spend much time on those as well! I do not
know whether we grudged the extra burden more or less than we came to love
the splendour, vastness and depth of their philosophy. ‘You must,’ my
father often said, “pursue these studies until the meaning of the four
characters FEI K’UNG CHIH K'UNG (voidness of the non-void) is as clear
to you as the orb of the sun blazing down from a cloudless autumn sky.’

“On some nights when I was especially weary, I liked to imagine that
the compassionate Kuan Yin appeared before me in the library in a blaze
of light. This never failed to wipe away my fatigue, making me as alert
as in the mornings. Afterwards I could read the sutras quickly, easily
and with greater understanding. I do not say that I truly saw her, unless
dimly with my mind’s eye, but I knew when and how sweetly she smiled or
when she was displeased with a feeling I sometimes had that reading so
many sutras was an intolerable chore. My fourth brother, who was sickly
and the only one of us to fail the examinations, was extremely fond of
me. When we were alone, we put aside the formality that had to be shown in
public by juniors to seniors, even brothers almost of an age. Once when
I had been describing what I liked to call the Bodhisattva’s personal
manifestations to me, he said, laughing： ‘How you flatter yourself,
Second Brother. Such things don’t hap' pen. If they do, why is it
always Kuan Yin and never Ta Shih-Chih who appears? The picture in our
shrine-room contains both of them; they get the same amount ofincense,
bowing and the rest. Why doesn’t Ta Shih-Chih do his share ofhealing
you? It is because you forget him that he plays no part in your imagination
-- for it 13‘ imagination, whatever you say.’

“His words set me thinking. I did not agree with his main point, but
he had made me feel guilty towards Ta Shih-Chih Bodhisattva, to Whom none
of us paid reverence except as one of three. I began offering him special
prayers. For several months I never went to sleep at night without first
sitting cross-legged on my bed and visualising Ta Shih-Chih. But when I
invoked him instead of Kuan Yin, there was no result. Never any result at
all. At last I spoke of this to my father. Unable to explain, he sent me
off to a monastery lying a few [1' beyond the city wall and overlooking a
stream bordered with ancient willows -- Kuan Yin’s emblem. On learning
why I had come, the elderly Tripitaka Master who presided there smiled
and said： ‘You alone cannot evoke him.’

“‘You mean, Venerable, that the Bodhisattvas are merely forms in
people’s minds?’ I protested, full ofwonder to hear a monk speak
so. Seeing him vigorously shake his head, I went on： ‘If they are real,
what need of many minds to give them power to appear?’

“‘What an ignorant young scholar you must be!’ he answered,
laughing. ‘Surely you know there are not many minds -- just Mind. All
the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, all the myriad objects exist in this one
Mind. How could it be otherwise? What is in your mind is naturally in
Mind itself; even so, until you have dissipated the great mountains of
obscurations constructed by karma earned in previous lives, you will not
have the power to call forth a response to the feeble thoughts you put
there. With Kuan Yin, the case is otherwise because so many millions of
beings invoke her. Now do you understand?’

“‘Venerable Sir, this worthless disciple can catch something of the
profound purport of your enlightening teaching,’ I answered formally,
though by no means sure I did. Satisfied, he raised his tea-cup in
dismissal.

“That night I sat up later than any of my brothers. The little libraryboy,
who had orders from my father to stay within call until the last of us
had handed him the books that needed putting away, replenished my tea-pot
three times before I remembered to tell him to go off to bed, promising
to put the flimsy volumes very carefully away in their blue boxes with my
own hands. No sooner had the child walked off sleepily than the far end of
the dimly lit library was illumined by a softly brilliant radiance and,
as I fell to my knees, a slim, majestically tall, richly garbed figure,
whom I took to be Kuan Yin was manifested in the centre of that circle of
very bright but not dazzling light. The garments of the two Bodhisattvas
being similar except for the head-dress, it took me a few moments to
recognise Ta Shih-Chih encircled by a nimbus of golden flame.

“‘Old Two,’ he announced in a thrillingly beautiful voice, but
addressing me informally by the nickname used by my father and uncles,
‘the Venerable Tripitaka Master erred. Know that your mind is in itself
immeasurable, the container ofa myriad myriad universes, each ofthem
vast beyond your comprehension. All the illimitable power that exists
in those myriads of universes would be yours in full, if you had wisdom
enough to use it. The same is true of every sentient being. Because your
faith in me was not well developed, I have come to you always as Kuan
Yin-not as I am now. Can you suppose we are two? Two in the great Mind
where no two exist? Can a Bodhisattva feel wounded by neglect for as long
as any other Bodhisattva is called upon? Not to speak of Bodhisattvas,
when a single bee sucks honey, all beings in the myriad myriad universes
suck honey; when a worm is crushed, all beings in those universes are
crushed. Remember the source of all power lies within yourself and cease
this foolish longing to behold mere manifestations.’

“The lovely vision faded and was gone. Since then, I have never
dared to call upon such beings, except as it should be done during
meditation. Seeking from them power beyond the infinite power of our
own mind, which is limited only by our own dark karmic obstructions, is
like what the sutras call ‘looking for a head upon your head! When,
at those previous times, Kuan Yin assuaged my fatigue, it was because
my mind willed that fatigue away, but needed the stimulation of the
Bodhisattva’s presence to function thus.

“Believe me, the Bodhisattvas are as real as earth and sky and have
infinite power to aid beings in distress, but they exist within our common
mind, which, to speak the truth, is itselfthe container of earth and sky.”

Both the mineralogist’s story and old Mr. Ch’e‘n’s illustrate
a concept not easy to grasp and perhaps not fully graspable until
Enlightenment is won; but they do make it clear that, when Kuan Yin is
regarded by some as a mental creation and by others as a being hardly
distinguishable from a goddess, there is no question of the one view
being right, the other wrong. She is both an abstraction and a goddess;
how one sees her depends upon one’s expectation and attitude of
mind. All such mental attitudes, though one may think of them as
“higher” or “lower” in the sense of exhibiting more or less
wisdom and understanding, are probably so far from the ultimate truth
that differences in one’s level of wisdom becomes negligible. Nor is it
certain that to perceive a Bodhisattva as a god -- or goddess-like being
does in fact demonstrate a lower degree of wisdom. All talk of high and
low, except in relative and provisional contexts, is beside the point.

  To the frogs in a temple pool
  The lotus-stems are tall;
  To the God; of Mount Everest
  An elephant is small.
