---
Source:
  ID: 937adfe1-da1a-4496-82c5-8061167c097c
  Locus:
    Chapter: LI
    Page: 88-89
Title: That men should have great wariness so that they understand not
  bodily a thing that is meant ghostly; and specially it is good to be
  wary in understanding of this word “in,” and of this word “up.”
---
And therefore lean meekly to this blind stirring of love in thine heart. I
mean not in thy bodily heart, but in thy ghostly heart, the which is thy
will. And be well wary that thou conceive not bodily that that is said
ghostly. For truly I tell thee, that bodily and fleshly conceits of them
that have curious and imaginative wits be cause of much error.

Ensample of this mayest thou see, by that that I bid thee hide thy desire
from God in that that in thee is. For peradventure an I had bidden thee shew
thy desire unto God, thou shouldest have conceived it more bodily than thou
dost now, when I bid thee hide it. For thou wottest well, that all that thing
that is wilfully hidden, it is cast into the deepness of spirit. And thus
me thinketh that it needeth greatly to have much wariness in understanding
of words that be spoken to ghostly intent, so that thou conceive them not
bodily but ghostly, as they be meant： and specially it is good to be wary
with this word in, and this word up. For in misconceiving of these two words
hangeth much error, and much deceit in them that purpose them to be ghostly
workers, as me thinketh. Somewhat wot I by the proof, and somewhat by hearsay;
and of these deceits list me tell thee a little as me thinketh.

A young disciple in God’s school new turned from the world, the same
weeneth that for a little time that he hath given him to penance and to
prayer, taken by counsel in confession, that he be therefore able to take
upon him ghostly working of the which he heareth men speak or read about him,
or peradventure readeth himself. And therefore when they read or hear spoken
of ghostly working-and specially of this word, “how a man shall draw all
his wit within himself,” or “how he shall climb above himself”-as
fast for blindness in soul, and for fleshliness and curiosity of natural
wit, they misunderstand these words, and ween, because they find in them a
natural covetyse to hid things, that they be therefore called to that work
by grace. Insomuch, that if counsel will not accord that they shall work in
this work, as soon they feel a manner of grumbling against their counsel,
and think-yea and peradventure say to such other as they be-that they can
find no man that can wit what they mean fully. And therefore as fast, for
boldness and presumption of their curious wit, they leave meek prayer and
penance over soon; and set them, they ween, to a full ghostly work within
in their soul. The which work, an it be truly conceived, is neither bodily
working nor ghostly working; and shortly to say, it is a working against
nature, and the devil is the chief worker thereof. And it is the readiest way
to death of body and of soul, for it is madness and no wisdom, and leadeth
a man even to madness. And yet they ween not thus： for they purpose them
in this work to think on nought but on God.
