---
Title: Concentration with Joy
Source:
  URL: https://jackkornfield.com/concentration-with-joy/ [2018-01-31]
  Source:
    Title: The Wise Heart
By: Jack Kornfield
---
First, sit quietly for a few minutes. Now reflect on the times in your life
when you are most absorbed, concentrated and fully present. They maybe while
gardening, playing tennis or basketball, writing computer code, listening
to a friend, or in business, creating art, making love or cooking.

Remember how it feels in your body to let go of distractions, to release
other places and times and give yourself fully just where you are. Sense the
wholeness, the focus, the pleasure of concentration and absorption. Sense
how satisfying it feels to the heart and mind. Remember the natural ease
and happiness, the flow that is present.

Now imagine developing and enjoying the same quality of absorption
and concentration and joy in meditation. Let yourself try it. The first
step will be to remain relaxed and alert. Sit in whatever way brings both
comfort and focus. Choose a simple meditation subject, counting the breath or
gently repeating a mantra like “Om mani padme hum,” or “breathing in,
calm mind, breathing out, kind heart.” Repeat it gently, over and over,
concentrating gently on your subject.

As you try this practice of concentration, you will notice distractions arise
again and again, like waves of the ocean washing over your focus. Gently
release each distraction and difficulty. Let each distraction go and subside
like a withdrawing wave. Continue steadily with your breath or mantra. To
bring a sense of pleasure, lift the corners of your mouth in a subtle half
smile like a Buddha.

Notice how your mind will settle down periodically. Sometimes you can
concentrate for only one minute, then again after five or ten. Each time
you feel settled or concentrated even for ten seconds, sense the tiny
bit of ease and joy that is in your body and mind. Relax, smile gently,
let the joy spread. Again and again try to sense the moments of beginning
concentration. Relax, rest in them, invite them to grow, as if saying to
yourself, “may ease increase, may joy increase, may steadiness increase.”
Trust the moments of concentration, let them build and deepen and grow. As
you do, you will gradually learn the art of concentration and receive its
steadiness and joy.
