---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 736
Tags:
  - Discernment-Truth=Knowledge=Profane Learning
  - Discernment-Truth=Reality=The One and the Many
  - Union-Identity=Realization And Identity=Know Thyself
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=Wayfaring
  - Sacrifice-Death=Separation-Sin=Closing the Doors of the Senses
  - Combat-Action=Judgement=On Hell and Damnation
By: Hugh of Saint-Victor
---
Ignorant and foolish men, with a labour as vain as it is obstinate, search out
the natures of things while they remain in ignorance of the One who is the
Author and Maker of themselves and of all things alike. Yet they do not inquire
after Him—as though without God truth might be found or happiness possessed.
And, that you may be able to appreciate more clearly still how barren and
indeed how pernicious such studies are, you must know that not only do they not
enlighten the mind to know the truth, but they actually blind it, so that it
cannot recognize the very truth. ...

What, then, does it profit a man to probe carefully into the nature of
everything and understand it thoroughly, if he neither remembers nor knows
whence he himself comes, nor whither he is going when this life is ended? For
what is this mortal life but a journey? For we are passing through, and we see
the things that are in this world as it were by the wayside. Does it follow,
then, that we should stop and enquire into anything we see as we pass that is
unusual or unfamiliar to us, and turn aside from our path for it? This is
exactly what the people you are looking at are doing. Like foolish travellers,
they have forgotten where they are going and have as it were sat down by the
road to investigate the unfamiliar things they see. By habitually giving way to
this folly they have already become such strangers to themselves that they do
not remember that they are on a journey, nor do they seek their homeland. ...
No life could be more disgraceful and no end more unhappy than to have no hope
of salvation when one dies, because one has been unwilling to take the path of
virtue while one lived.
