---
Tags:
  - Trials=Liberation
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 379- 381
  Source:
    Title: Who Dies?
By: Stephen Levine
---
I received a call not long ago from a woman I have known for some years
who has been a prostitute and heroin addict. She had been involved in this
life for about twelve years, until her best friend died in her arms of
an overdose of heroin two years before. She said she just couldn’t hide
any more. The pain was too great, and she decided not to pull back, but to
go right to the edge of her holding and play it for all it was worth. She
moved out of downtown San Francisco and found an apartment in the suburbs
where she got a job in a large office and began, as someone put it, “to
take herself apart, bone by bone," not to let anything go by unexamined.

Now this kind of fierceness, which attempts to compensate for years of
hiding, also has a tendency to breed certain qualities of self-judgment,
which she discovered too had to be worked with, had to be seen as an edge,
had to be let go of.

Her commitment is so great, because the pain in her life has been so
intense. She has been brought to a place where she is willing to stop
deadening the pain with temporary satisfactions so she can go to the root
of what or who is suffering. She said that she had to come to a point
where there was no place to turn, except inward.

So, the unexpected or unwanted brings each of us to the edge of our
pain. But we begin to investigate what causes the pain and posturing. We
come to the fear, the doubt, the anger that we usually withdraw from,
and gently enter into it. We often find that we don’t know what anger
is or guilt is or fear is. Because we have always pushed these qualities
away or compulsively acted them out, with very little awareness of what was
happening. We don’t know what these qualities of mind are because as we
have approached our edge we have withdrawn into the drowsy blindness of a
life only partially lived. We have judged these qualities as unworthy ofour
fantasy ofour imagined self. And, in order to protect that mirage of some
separate worthy solidity, instead of using the signal ofour attachment,
our pain, as a notice to go beyond our cage, we have withdrawn from the
edge oflife. We have postponed our life in the same way we are attempting
to postpone our death.

A friend, taking robes as a Buddhist monk in Thailand, went to stud),
with one ofthe great meditation masters. When he met with the teacher,
the teacher said, “I hope you are not afraid to suffer.” Because ifyou
want to find the truth, you cannot allow your resistance to continually
motivate you. We are constantly hiding and posturing, inventing an
acceptable reality, instead of meeting with the pain and resistance which
so cloud understanding. We continually elude our liberation because of an
unwillingness to open to the stuff which has been locked in by years of
postponing life. All the encrustations of the heart, all the mercilessness
to ourselves, all our fear of letting go of who we think we are.

And this is the condition we find ourselves in. It’s not something
to judge. It‘s just something to notice. Here we all are, with so
many unwanted states of mind. And we pull back. Our reaction limits
our openness to what comes next. Fear arises, we close. Doubt arises,
we close. Anger arises, we close. Death arises, we close.

To some, this encouragement to acknowledge the blockages of the heart and
the confusion of the mind may seem quite negative. But actually what we
are speaking about is the path of joy. The acknowledgment of the stuff
which closes us allows a softening, a melting away at the edges. And the
spaciousness which results illuminates that which has always been there,
our original nature shining through, the joy of pure being, the stillness
of the underlying reality we all share.

Indeed, the mind is always dreaming itself. So we start coming to the edge
of the dream, start cultivating the compassion to let go. We relearn the
ability to experience life as it unfolds, to play lightly without force
or judgment. It is not a war. It is at last a kindness to ourselves,
which gives rise in time, with constancy, to a spacious participation in
the flow of change, beyond ideas of loss and gain, beyond ideas of life
and death; opening into just this much, the vastness of what is.

We begin to open to awareness itself, threatened by nothing, withdrawing
from nothing, becoming one with life. Perfectly prepared for death,
knowing that nothing can separate us from our true nature and that only
our forgetfulness can obscure it.
