---
Source:
  ID: c80a4d1f-bb8a-43b7-97bd-2e99c8e05da8
  Locus:
    URL: "http://experimentaltheology.blogspot.com/2018/01/let-us-die-\
      then-and-enter-into-darkness.html"
    Date: January 16, 2018
By: St Bonaventure
Title: Let Us Die, Then, And Enter Into the Darkness
---
Christ is both the way and the door. Christ is the staircase and the vehicle,
like the throne of mercy over the Ark of the Covenant, and the mystery hidden
from the ages.

A man should turn his full attention to this throne of mercy, and should gaze
at him hanging on the cross, full of faith, hope and charity, devoted, full of
wonder and joy, marked by gratitude, and open to praise and jubilation. Then
such a man will make with Christ a pasch, that is, a passing-over. Through
the branches of the cross he will pass over the Red Sea, leaving Egypt and
entering the desert. There he will taste the hidden manna, and rest with Christ
in the sepulcher, as if he were dead to things outside. He will experience,
as much as is possible for one who is still living, what was promised to
the thief who hung beside Christ： Today you will be with me in paradise.

For this passover to be perfect, we must suspend all the operations of the
mind and we must transform the peak of our affections, directing them to God
alone. This is a sacred mystical experience. It cannot be comprehended by
anyone unless he surrenders himself to it; nor can he surrender himself to
it unless he longs for it; nor can he long for it unless the Holy Spirit,
whom Christ sent into the world, should come and inflame his innermost soul...

If you ask how such things can occur, seek the answer in God’s grace, not in
doctrine; in the longing of the will, not in the understanding; in the sighs
of prayer, not in research; seek the bridegroom not the teacher; God and not
man; darkness not daylight; and look not to the light but rather to the raging
fire that carries the soul to God with intense fervor and glowing love. The
fire is God, and the furnace is in Jerusalem, fired by Christ in the ardor of
his loving passion. Only he understood this who said： My soul chose hanging
and my bones death. Anyone who cherishes this kind of death can see God...

Let us die, then, and enter into the darkness, silencing our anxieties,
our passions and all the fantasies of our imagination. Let us pass over with
the crucified Christ from this world to the Father, so that, when the Father
has shown himself to us, we can say with Philip： It is enough.
