---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 862
  Source:
    Title: Maha Satipatthana Suttanta
Tags:
  - 859
  - 338
  - 136
  - 914
---
The one and only path, bhikkhus, leading to the purification of beings,
to passing far beyond grief and lamentation, to the dying-out of ill and
misery, to the attainment of right method, to the realization of Nirvâna,
is that of the fourfold setting-up of mindfulness. ...

A brother -- whether he departs or returns, whether he looks at or looks
away from, whether he has drawn in or stretched out his limbs, whether he
has donned under-robe, over-robe, or bowl, whether he is eating, drinking,
chewing, reposing, or whether he is obeying the calls of nature -- is aware
of what he is about. In going, standing, sitting, sleeping, watching, talking,
or keeping silence, he knows what he is doing. ...

A brother when affected by a feeling of pleasure, (is) aware of it,
reflecting： ‘I feel a pleasurable feeling.’ So, too, is he aware when
affected by a painful feeling, or by a neutral feeling, or by a pleasant or
painful or neutral feeling concerning material things, or by a pleasant or
painful or neutral feeling concerning spiritual things. ...

A brother, if his thought be lustful, is aware that it is so, or if his
thought be free from lust, is aware that it is so; or if his thought be
full of hate, or free from hate, or dull, or intelligent, or attentive, or
distrait, or exalted, or not exalted, or mediocre, or ideal, or composed,
or discomposed, or liberated, or bound, he is aware in each case that his
thought is so, reflecting： ‘My thought is lustful,’ and so on. ...

And so, too, with respect to the organ of hearing and sounds, to the organ of
smell and odours, to the organ of taste and tastes, to the organ of touch and
tangibles, to the sensorium and images, he is aware of the sense and of the
object, of any fetter which arises on account of both, of how there comes an
uprising of a fetter not arisen before, of how there comes a putting-aside
of a fetter that has arisen, and of how in the future there shall arise no
fetter that has been put aside. ...

And what, bhikkhus, is right mindfulness?

Herein, O bikkhus, a brother, as to the body, continues so to look upon the
body, that he remains ardent, self-possessed and mindful, having overcome both
the hankering and the dejection common in the world. And in the sarrje way as
to feeling, thoughts and ideas, he so looks upon each, that he remains ardent,
self-possessed and mindful, having overcome the hankering and the dejection
that is common in the world. This is what is called right mindfulness.
