---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 470
  Source:
    Title: Apocalyse of Thomas
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
References:
  - Body: |
      Let us explore together the secret of a deeper devotion, a more
      subterranean sanctuary of the soul, where the Light Within never
      fades, but burns, a perpetual Flame. ... Theologies and symbols and
      creeds, though inevitable, are transient and become obsolescent, while
      the Life of God weeps (sic) on through the souls of men in continued
      revelation and creative newness. ... And one knows now why Pascal
      wrote, in the centre of his greatest moment, the single word.
      "Fire”. ... Only absolutes satisfy the soul committed to holy
      obedience. ...
      Some of us will have lo enter upon a vow of renunciation and of
      dedication to the “Eternal Internal" which is as complete and as
      irrevocable as was the vow of the monk of the Middle Ages. Little
      groups of such utterly dedicated souls, knowing one another in Divine
      Fellowship. ... ready to go the second half, obedient as a shadow,
      sensitive as a shadow, selfless as a shadow -- such bands of humble
      prophets can recreate the Society of Friends and the Christian church
      and shake the countryside for ten miles around. ...

      The mark of this simplified life is radiant joy. It lives in the
      Fellowship of the Transfigured Face. ... in childlike trust listening
      ever to Eternity's whisper, walking with a smile into the dark. ...
      And the Fellowship of the Horny Hands is identical with the Fellowship
      of the Transfigured Face, in this Mary-Martha life In the Fellowship
      cultural and educational and national and racial differences are
      levelled We find men with chilly theologies but with glowing hearts.
      We overleap the boundaries of church membership.. . . In peace and
      power and confidence we work upon such apparently hopeless tasks as
      the elimination of war from society, and set out toward
      world-brotherhood and interracial fraternity. ...

      Each one of us can live such a life of amazing power and peace and
      serenity. ... We have all heard this holy Whisper at times. ... the
      welling-up whispers of divine guidance. ... And under the silent,
      watchful eye of the Holy One we all are standing, whether we know it
      or not. And in that Centre, in that holy Abyss where the Eternal
      dwells at the base of our being ... we centre down, as the old phrase
      goes, and live in that holy Silence which is dearer than life. ...
      I should like to testify to this, as a personal experience, graciously
      given. ... I only speak to you because it is a sacred trust, not mine
      but to be given to others.
    Source: Thomas R. Kelly： A Testament of Devotion, London. 1943. passim
  - Body: |
      Feeling gives us our knowledge of values In a Quaker meeting for
      worship or for business a speaker seldom remarks "I think” but
      generally "I feel”. ... The impact of Authority or Reason ... is
      not typical of the Quaker method.
    Source: 
      By: Howard Brinton
      Title: Friends for 300 Years
      Publisher: Harper & Bros.
      Copyright: 1952
      Locus: 87, 121, 120
    Commentary: |
      The Catholic devotional mystic and the Hindu bhakta are not obliged to
      ‘think’ either, but here it is the orthodoxy of their respective
      traditional frameworks which performs this function on their behalf.
  - Body: |
      Be a fool, my brother in God. and seek the Black Diamond which is in
      thee.
    Source: A Disciple, op. cit.. June.  1954
---
In the last time ... every man shall speak that which pleaseth him.
