---
Tags:
  - Revelation=Archetypes, Myth, and Ritual
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 214-215
  Source:
    Title: Reflections on the Art of Living
By: Joseph Campbell
---
Have I ever told you about the ritual in Kentucky where I had to give up
seven things? It was one of the most interesting group experiences I’ve
ever had. We were a group of about forty-nine people in one of those meetings
of some society for the transformation of consciousness. Two couples from
the University of Vermont, professors and their wives, had arranged a ritual
that we were all going to undertake. We were divided into seven groups of
seven and told to spend a day thinking of the seven things without which
we’d not want to live： “What are the seven things for which you
feel your life is worth living?” Then you were to gather seven little
objects, small enough to hold in your hand, which were to represent your
seven cherished things, and you were to know which was which.

In the evening we went down a wooded road in the dark to the mouth of a
cave. The cave had a wooden door on it which could be opened. In front
of the door was a man wearing the mask of a dog： Cerberus at the gate
of hell. He put his hand out and said, “Give me that which you least
cherish.” When you gave him one of the little objects you were holding,
he opened the door and allowed you to enter.

Then you proceeded forward through the cave, an enormous place, holding
the six remaining things you most cherished. On five further occasions,
you were asked to surrender that which you least cherished, until you were
left with one object that represented what you treasured most. And you
found out what it was, believe me. You really, really did. And the order
in which you gave up your treasures was revelatory： you really knew
what your order of values was. Then you came to an exit, where there were
two people between whom you had to go. But before you could go through
that guarded exit, you had to give up that which you most cherished.

I can tell you that ritual worked. All of the participants with whom
I’ve talked had an actual experience ofmoska, “release,” when they
had given up their last treasure. One damned fool was the exception. He did
not give up anything. That’s how seriously this ritual was taken. When he
was asked to give up something, he just stooped down, picked up a pebble,
and handed that over. That’s the refusal of the call.

 ... every failure to cope with a life situation must be laid, in the
end, to a restriction of conciousness. Wars and temper tantrums are the
makeshifts ofignorance; regrets are illumination： come too late.

The exciting thing to me was the actual experience. It was a feeling of
joyous participation. Watching your earlier bondages go really did change
your feeling for the treasures you’d given up. It increased your love
for them without the tenacity. I was amazed.
