---
Tags:
  - Trials=The Struggle with Evil
Source:
  ID: 93173f7a-2fe5-4239-96a6-da623d8094b1
  Title: God in All Worlds
  Locus:
    Page: 327-328
  Source:
    Title: Light on Life Problems
    Editor: Kisher Gandhi
By: Sri Aurobindo
---
The moralist enjoins the practice of virtue by laying down the dictum that
good must create good and evil must create evil in accordance with the
law that like creates like. “Do unto others as you would be done by,"
he says, because then they will indeed so do to you. The strict pacifist,
for example, would never admit the use of violence or a resort to war in any
circumstances whatsoever on the ground that violence leads always to further
violence. Does any such strict rule of moral return prevail in actual life?

The rule is true to a certain extent in tendency and works sometimes
well enough and the prudential intelligence of man takes some account
of it in action, but it is not true all the way and all the time. It is
evident enough that hatred, violence, injustice are likely to create an
answering hatred, violence and injustice and that I can only indulge these
propensities with impunity if I am sufficiently powerful to defy resistance
or so long as I am at once strong and prudent enough to provide against
their natural reactions. It is true also that by doing good and kindness
I create a certain good-will in others and can rely under ordinary or
favourable circumstances not so much on gratitude and return in kind as
on their support and favour. But this good and this evil are both ofthem
movements ofthe ego, and on the mixed egoism of human nature there can
be no safe or positive reliance. An egoistic selfish strength, ifit
knows what to do and where to stop, even a certain measure of violence
and injustice, if it is strong and skilful, cunning, fraud, many kinds
ofevil, do actually pay in man's dealing with man hardly less than in the
animal’s with the animal, and on the other hand the doer of good who
counts on a return or reward finds himself as often as not disappointed
of his bargained recompense.

Why is this so?

It is because the weakness of human nature worships the power that tramples
on it, does homage to successful strength, can return to every kind of
strong or skilful imposition, belief, acceptance, obedience： it can
crouch and lawn and admire even amidst movements of hatred and terror;
it has singular loyalties and unreasoning instincts. And its disloyalties
too are as unreasoning or light and fickle： it takes just dealing and
beneficence as its right and forgets 0r cares not to repay. And there
is worse; for justice, mercy, beneficence, kindness are often enough
rewarded by their opposites and ill-will an answer to good-will is a
brutally common experience. Ifsomething in the world and in man returns
good for good and evil for evil, it as often returns evil for good and,
with or without a conscious moral intention, good for evil. And even an
unegoistic virtue or a divine good and love entering the world awakens
hostile reactions. Attila and Ienghiz on the throne to the end, Christ on
the cross and Socrates drinking his potion of hemlock are not very clear
evidence for any optimistic notion of a law of moral return in the world
ofhuman nature.

If not in human nature, does this law operate in the action of the larger
world measures?

There is little more sign ofits sure existence in the world
measures. Actually in the cosmic dispensation evil comes out of good and
good out of evil and there seems to be no exact correspondence between the
moral and the vital measures. All that we can say is that good done tends
to increase the sum and total power of good in the world and the greater
this grows, the greater is likely to be the sum of human happiness, and
that evil done tends to increase the sum and total power of evil in the
world and the greater this grows, the greater is likely to be the sum of
human suffering and, eventually, man or nation doing evil has in some way
to pay for it, but not often in any intelligibly graded or apportioned
measure and not always in clearly translating terms of vital good fortune
and ill fortune.
