---
Title: Practice Recognizing Our Mental States
Source:
  URL: https://jackkornfield.com/practice-recognizing-our-mental-states/
    [2018-01-31]
  Source:
    Title: The Wise Heart
By: Jack Kornfield
---
You can begin to study the effects of the states of mind that fill your days.
To start, it helps to become deliberately aware of the states that arise on
your difficult days, days where you are caught up in problems, conflict,
unhappiness. Instead of ignoring, judging or being lost in them, begin to
carefully notice which states are predominant.

Choose a difficult day to mindfully observe your mental states like an
anthropologist, without judgment or resistance. Usually several difficult
states will appear together. They may include worry, agitation, anger,
confusion, grasping, restlessness and misperception.

Determine that three times during this day you have deemed difficult, you will
carefully notice and track the course of your mental states. Notice which are
present, their level of intensity, how long they last and how much you are
caught up in them. If it is helpful, make notes and write them down. Do this
again on two more such days. After three days, sense what effect the mindful
acknowledgement of difficult states has had. If it has been illuminating or
released you from their grip, continue the practice.

Next, in the same way, look for a day that you feel to be most positive,
and start to mindfully observe the healthy states which are present. You can
review the list of healthy mental factors. You may notice states of balance,
clarity, flexibility, graciousness, love, wisdom, confidence or joy. Notice
the predominant states, their level of intensity, how long they last and
whether there is grasping of them. Again, if helpful, make notes. Do this
again on two more such days.

After three days, sense the effect this mindful acknowledgement of healthy
states has had. Recognize that you can be aware of and support these healthy
states with your attention. Now that you have learned to do so, continue
this practice.
