---
By: Rumi
Source:
  URL: http://www.khamush.com/divani_shams.htm
  Locus:
    Date: 28 February 2018
  Source:
    Translator: R. A. Nicholson
    Title: Selected Poems from the Divani Shamsi Tabriz
    Copyright: 1898
    Source:
      Title: Divani Shamsi Tabriz
      Chapter: XXV
---
Look on me, for thou art my companion in the grave
On the night when thou shalt pass from shop and dwelling.
Thou shalt hear my hail in the hollow of the tomb： it shall become known to
 thee
That thou wast never concealed from mine eve.
I am as reason and intellect within thy bosom
At the time of joy and gladness, at the time of sorrow and distress.
O strange night when thou hear'st the well-known voice,
Scap'st from the stroke of asp, and leap'st from the horror of ant!
Love's intoxication will bring to thy grave, as a gift,
Wine and mistress and candle and meats and sweets and incense.
In the hour when the intellectual lamp is lighted,
What a paean goes up from the dead men in the tombs!
The earth of the grave-yard is confounded by their cries,
By the din of the drums of resurrection, by the pomp of rising from the
 dead.
They have rent their shrouds, they have pressed tight their two ears in
 terror.
What is brain and ear before the blast of the trumpet?
Look to thine eye, that thou mistake not,
That unto thee the essence of seer and seen may be one.
To whatever side thou gaze, my form thou shalt espy
Whether thou gaze on self or towards that moil and mell.
Shun distorted vision and heal thine eyes,
For in that moment the evil eye shall be far from my beauty.
O take heed, lest thou misconceive me in human shape,
For spirit is very subtle, and love is very jealous.
What room for form, if the felt is hundredfold?
'Tis the rays of the soul's mirror that bring the world to view.
Had they sought God instead of morsel and pittance,
Thou hadst not seen a single blind man seated on the moat-edge.
Since Thou hast opened house in our city as dealer in amorous glances,
Deal out glances, like light, with closed lips.
I hold my peace and keep the unworthy in the dark;
Thou art all that is worthy： the mystery is veiled from me.
Come, like the Sun of Tabriz, towards the east;
See the star of victory and the conqueror's banner!
