---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Locus:
    Hexagram: "12 - ䷋ - P'i"
    Line: 5
    Page: 90-93
By: Somadeva
---
In old times there was a certain petty monarch of the name of Jayadatta,
and there was born to him a son, named Devadatta. And that wise king,
wishing to marry his son, who was grown up, thus reflected： “The
prosperity of kings is very unstable, being like a courtesan to be enjoyed
by force; but the prosperity of merchants is like a woman of good family;
it is steady and does not fly to another man. Therefore I will take a
wife to my son from a merchant’s family, in order that misfortune may
not overtake his throne, though it is surrounded with many relations.”
Having formed this resolve, that king sought for his son the daughter of
a merchant in Pataliputra named Vasudatta. Vasudatta for his part, eager
for such a distinguished alliance, gave that daughter of his to the prince,
though he dwelt in a remote foreign land.

And he loaded his son-in-law with wealth to such an extent that he no longer
felt much respect for his father’s magnificence. Then King Jayadatta
dwelt happily with that son of his who had obtained the daughter of that
rich merchant. Now one day the merchant Vasudatta came, full of desire
to see his daughter, to the palace of his connection by marriage, and
took away his daughter to his own home. Shortly after the King Jayadatta
suddenly went to heaven, and that kingdom was seized by his relations,
who rose in rebellion; through fear of them his son Devadatta was secretly
taken away by his mother during the night to another country.

Then that mother, distressed in soul, said to the prince： “Our feudal
lord is the emperor who rules the eastern region; repair to him, my son;
he will procure you the kingdom.”

When his mother said this to him, the prince answered her： “Who will
respect me if I go there without attendants?” When she heard that,
his mother went on to say： “Go to the house of your father-in-law,
and get money there, and so procure followers; and then repair to the
emperor.” Being urged in these words by his mother, the prince, though
full of shame, slowly plodded on and reached his father-in-law’s house
in the evening. But he could not bear to enter at such an unseasonable
hour, for he was afraid of shedding tears, being bereaved of his father
and having lost his worldly splendor; besides, shame withheld him.

So he remained in the veranda of an almshouse nearby, and at night he
suddenly beheld a woman descending with a rope from his father-in-law’s
house, and immediately he recognized her as his wife, for she was so
resplendent with jewels that she looked like a meteor fallen from the
clouds; and he was much grieved thereat. But she, though she saw him,
did not recognize him, as he was emaciated and begrimed, and asked him
who he was. When he heard that, he answered： “I am a traveler.”
Then the merchant’s daughter entered the almshouse, and the prince
followed her secretly to watch her. There she advanced toward a certain
man, and he toward her, and asking why she had come so late, he bestowed
several kicks on her. Then the passion of the wicked woman was doubled,
and she appeased him, and remained with him on the most affectionate terms.

When he saw that, the discreet prince reflected： “This is not the
time for me to show anger, for I have other affairs in hand; and how
could I employ against these two contemptible creatures, this wife of
mine and the man who has done me this wrong, this sword which is to
be used against my foes? Or what quarrel have I with this adulteress,
for this is the work of malignant desire that showers calamities upon
me, showing skill in the game of testing my firmness? It is my marriage
with a woman below me in rank that is in fault, not the woman herself;
how can a female crow leave the male crow to take pleasure in a cuckoo?”

Thus reflecting, he allowed that wife of his to remain in the society of
her paramour, for in the minds of heroes possessed with an ardent desire
of victory, of what importance is woman, valueless as a straw? But at
the moment when his wife ardently embraced her paramour there fell from
her ear an ornament thickly studded with valuable jewels. And she did
not observe this, but at the end of her interview, taking leave of her
paramour, returned hurriedly to her house as she came. And that unlawful
lover also departed somewhere or other.

Then the prince saw that jeweled ornament, and took it up; it flashed with
many jewel-gleams, dispelling the gathering darkness of despondency, and
seemed like a hand-lamp obtained by him to assist him in searching for
his lost prosperity. The prince immediately perceived that it was very
valuable, and went off, having obtained all he required, to Kanyakubja;
there he pledged that ornament for a hundred thousand gold pieces, and after
buying horses and elephants went into the presence of the emperor. And with
the troops which he gave him he marched, and slew his enemies in fight,
and recovered his father’s kingdom; and his mother applauded his success.

Then he redeemed from pawn that ornament, and sent it to his father-in-law
to reveal that unsuspected secret; his father-in-law, when he saw that
earring of his daughter’s, which had come to him in such a way, was
confounded, and showed it to her. She looked upon it, lost long ago like
her own virtue; and when she heard that it had been sent by her husband
she was distracted, and called to mind the whole circumstance： “This
is the very ornament which I let fall in the almshouse the night] saw
that unknown traveler standing there; so that must undoubtedly have been
my husband come to test my virtue, but I did not recognize him, and he
picked up this ornament.”

While the merchant’s daughter was going through this train of reflection,
her heart, afflicted by the misfortune of her unchastity having been
discovered, in its agony, broke. Then her father artfully questioned a
maid of hers who knew all her secrets, and found out the truth, and so
ceased to mourn for his daughter; as for the prince, after he recovered
the kingdom, he obtained as wife the daughter of the emperor, won by his
virtues, and enjoyed the highest prosperity.
