---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Locus:
    Page: 374-375
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Powers of Darkness
  - Sacrifice-Death=Illusion=The Consummation of Desire
  - Combat-Action=Orthodoxy-Ritual-Method=The Spiritual Master
  - Life-Love=The Primordial State=The Terrestrial Paradise
Format: Verse
By: \'Attâr
Commentary: This follows the traditional symbolism of labyrinths and
  mazes： cf. Coomaraswamy： 'The Iconography of Diirer's "Knots" and
  Leonardo's "Concatenation" '： The Art Quarterly. Spring. 1944.
---
-- A Road indeed that never Wing before
Flew, nor Foot trod, nor Heart imagined -- o’er
Waterless Deserts --  Waters where no Shore --
Valleys comprising cloudhigh Mountains： these
Again their Valleys deeper than the Seas：
Whose Dust all Adders, and whose vapour Fire：
Where all once hostile Elements conspire
To set the Soul against herself, and tear
Courage to Terror -- Hope into Despair.
And Madness： Terrors. Trials, to make stray
Or stop where Death to wander or delay：
Where when half dead with Famine. Toil, and Heat.
Twas Death indeed to rest, or drink, or eat.
A road still waxing in Self-sacrifice
As it went on： still ringing with the Cries
And Groans of Those who had not yet prevail'd.
And bleaching with the Bones of those who fail'd：
Where, almost all withstood, perhaps to earn
Nothing： and. earning, never to return. --

And first the VALE OF SEARCH： an endless Maze,
Branching into innumerable Ways
All courting Entrance： but one right： and this
Beset with Pitfall. Gulf, and Precipice.
Where Dust is Embers. Air a fiery Sleet.
Through which with blinded Eyes and bleeding Feet
The Pilgrim stumbles, with Hyaena’s Howl
Around, and hissing Snake, and deadly Ghoul,
Whose Prey he falls if tempted but to droop.
Or if to wander famish’d from the Troop
For fruit that falls to ashes in the Hand,
Water that reacht recedes into the Sand.
The only word is ‘Forward!’ Guide in sight.
After him. swerving neither left nor right.
Thyself for thine own Victual by Day.
At nigfit thine own Selfs Caravanserai.
Till suddenly, perhaps when most subdued
And desperate, the Heart shall 'be renew’d
When deep in utter Darkness, by one Gleam
Of Glory from the far remote Harm,
That, with a scarcely conscious Shock of Change.
Shall light the Pilgrim toward the Mountain Range
Of Knowledge. ...
