---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Source:
    ID: ce3f70aa-4448-4cfd-a1b7-4a32eb5e8df0
    Title: I Ching
  Locus:
    Page: 18-19
    Hexagram: 2 - ䷁ - K'un
    Line: 2
By: Henry Louis Mencken
---
You asked me, in brief, what satisfaction I get out of life, and why I go
on working. I go on working for the same reason that a hen goes on laying
eggs. There is in every living creature an obscure but powerful impulse to
active functioning. Life demands to be lived, lnaction, save as a measure
of recuperation between bursts of activity, is painful and dangerous to the
healthy organism -- in fact, it is almost impossible. Only the dying can be
really idle.

The precise form of an individual’s activity is determined, of course,
by the equipment with which he came into the world. In other words, it is
determined by this heredity. I do not lay eggs, as a hen does, because I was
born without any equipment for it. For the same reason I do not get myself
elected to Congress, or play the violon-cello, or teach metaphysics in a
college, or work in a steel mill. What I do is simply what lies easiest to
my hand. It happens that I was born with an intense and insatiable interest
in ideas, and thus like to play with them. It happens also that I was born
with rather more than the average facility for putting them into words. In
consequence, I am a writer and editor, which is to say, a dealer in them and
a concocter of them. There is very little conscious volition in all this.
What I do was ordained by the inscrutable fates, not chosen by me. In my
boyhood, yielding to a powerful but still subordinate interest in exact
facts, I wanted to be a chemist, and at the same time my poor father tried
to make me a business man. At other times, like any other relatively poor
man, I have longed to make a lot of money by some easy swindle. But I became
a writer all the same, and shall remain one until the end of the chapter,
just as a cow goes on giving milk all her life, even though what appears to
be her self-interest urges her to give gin.
