---
Source:
  ID: 503bbcad-73dd-49e6-96a0-bde44020aeb4
  Title: The Man of Many Qualities
  By: R. G. H. Siu
  Source:
    ID: ce3f70aa-4448-4cfd-a1b7-4a32eb5e8df0
    Title: I Ching
  Locus:
    Page: 24
    Hexagram: 3 - ䷂ - Chun
    Line: 4
By: Jean Galbert de Campistron
Format: verse
---
For more than twenty years, thou knowest well, sir,
'Tis we two that have swayed the Emperor’s mind.
Between us he divides his heart and power,
And we dictate the orders that he gives.
To rob thee of the station which thou holdest,
Chagrined and desperate I have oft conspired;
And thou, impelled against me by like envy, --
Thou has assailed my favor and my life.
I feared thee only; thou didst fear me only;
And since we needs must now speak honestly,
It was with reason that, jealous of each other,
Thou fearedest my power and that I feared thine, --
For each of us, appraising well his rival
Quaked lest the other should o’erthrow his fortunes,
Alike assured, fain to destroy each other,
That one of us sufficed to rule the Empire.

Oft, when our strife was ready to subside,
The Emperor has been careful to maintain it.
Our quarrel hath served him better than Our zeal;
Each of us was a faithful minister,
Whose eyes, fixed on a single enemy,
Would keep him ever constant in his duty;
And thus, so long as lived our mutual hatred,
The Emperor has enjoyed the fruit of it.

It needs must end; the time for that has come.
Thou knowest how matters stand, sir, in this Court：
That the Emperor, nearly two months ago,
By marrying Irene, assumed new ties;
That from his hapless son he snatched this princess,
Breaking the bonds their plighted troth had formed.
To wrath now Andronicus gives his soul up,
And if he spares his father in his rage,
If he respects him still, ah! do not doubt
That he will let its lightnings fall on us.
He thinks that his sad fate was our contrivance;
He thinks that in resolving on a second
Marriage and forming thus a tie that wronged him,
The Emperor followed thy advice and mine.
We stand in equal peril, have fears in common.
Let us unite our hearts, sir, and our fortunes;
And let us hasten to build for our defense
Bulwarks which Andronicus cannot shatter.
