---
By: Bernardo Kastrup
Title: Should Quantim Anomalies Make Us Rethink Reality?
Source:
  URL: "https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/\
    should-quantum-anomalies-make-us-rethink-reality/"
  Locus:
    Date: 19 April 2018
  Publisher: Scientific American
  Copyright: 2018
References:
  - Title: Saving the Appearances
    By: Owen Barfiel
  - Title: The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
    By: Thomas Kuhn
---
Every generation tends to believe that its views on the nature of reality
are either true or quite close to the truth. We are no exception to
this： although we know that the ideas of earlier generations were each
time supplanted by those of a later one, we still believe that this time
we got it right. Our ancestors were naïve and superstitious, but we are
objective -- or so we tell ourselves. We know that matter/energy, outside
and independent of mind, is the fundamental stuff of nature, everything
else being derived from it -- or do we?

In fact, studies have shown that there is an intimate relationship
between the world we perceive and the conceptual categories encoded in the
language we speak. We don’t perceive a purely objective world out there,
but one subliminally pre-partitioned and pre-interpreted according to
culture-bound categories. For instance, “color words in a given language
shape human perception of color.” A brain imaging study suggests that
language processing areas are directly involved even in the simplest
discriminations of basic colors. Moreover, this kind of “categorical
perception is a phenomenon that has been reported not only for color,
but for other perceptual continua, such as phonemes, musical tones and
facial expressions.” In an important sense, we see what our unexamined
cultural categories teach us to see, which may help explain why every
generation is so confident in their own worldview. Allow me to elaborate.

The conceptual-ladenness of perception isn’t a new insight. Back in 1957,
philosopher Owen Barfield wrote：

“I do not perceive any thing with my sense-organs alone. ... Thus,
I may say, loosely, that I ‘hear a thrush singing.’ But in strict
truth all that I ever merely ‘hear’ -- all that I ever hear simply by
virtue of having ears-is sound. When I ‘hear a thrush singing,’ I am
hearing ... with all sorts of other things like mental habits, memory,
imagination, feeling and ... will.”

As argued by philosopher Thomas Kuhn in his book The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions, science itself falls prey to this inherent subjectivity of
perception. Defining a “paradigm” as an “implicit body of intertwined
theoretical and methodological belief,” he wrote：

“something like a paradigm is prerequisite to perception itself. What
a man sees depends both upon what he looks at and also upon what his
previous visual-conceptual experience has taught him to see. In the
absence of such training there can only be, in William James’s phrase,
‘a bloomin’ buzzin’ confusion.’”

Hence, because we perceive and experiment on things and events partly
defined by an implicit paradigm, these things and events tend to confirm,
by construction, the paradigm. No wonder then that we are so confident
today that nature consists of arrangements of matter/energy outside and
independent of mind.

Yet, as Kuhn pointed out, when enough “anomalies” -- empirically
undeniable observations that cannot be accommodated by the reigning belief
system-accumulate over time and reach critical mass, paradigms change. We
may be close to one such a defining moment today, as an increasing body of
evidence from quantum mechanics (QM) renders the current paradigm untenable.

Indeed, according to the current paradigm, the properties of an object
should exist and have definite values even when the object is not being
observed： the moon should exist and have whatever weight, shape, size
and color it has even when nobody is looking at it. Moreover, a mere act of
observation should not change the values of these properties. Operationally,
all this is captured in the notion of “non-contextuality”： the
outcome of an observation should not depend on the way other, separate
but simultaneous observations are performed. After all, what I perceive
when I look at the night sky should not depend on the way other people
look at the night sky along with me, for the properties of the night sky
uncovered by my observation should not depend on theirs.

The problem is that, according to QM, the outcome of an observation can
depend on the way another, separate but simultaneous, observation is
performed. This happens with so-called “quantum entanglement” and
it contradicts the current paradigm in an important sense, as discussed
above. Although Einstein argued in 1935 that the contradiction arose merely
because QM is incomplete, John Bell proved mathematically, in 1964, that
the predictions of QM regarding entanglement cannot be accounted for by
Einstein’s alleged incompleteness.

So to salvage the current paradigm there is an important sense in which
one has to reject the predictions of QM regarding entanglement. Yet, since
Alain Aspect’s seminal experiments in 1981-82, these predictions have
been repeatedly confirmed, with potential experimental loopholes closed
one by one. 1998 was a particularly fruitful year, with two remarkable
experiments performed in Switzerland and Austria. In 2011 and 2015,
new experiments again challenged non-contextuality. Commenting on this,
physicist Anton Zeilinger has been quoted as saying that “there is no
sense in assuming that what we do not measure [that is, observe] about
a system has [an independent] reality.” Finally, Dutch researchers
successfully performed a test closing all remaining potential loopholes,
which was considered by Nature the “toughest test yet.”

The only alternative left for those holding on to the current paradigm is
to postulate some form of non-locality： nature must have -- or so they
speculate -- observation-independent hidden properties, entirely missed
by QM, which are “smeared out” across spacetime. It is this allegedly
omnipresent, invisible but objective background that supposedly orchestrates
entanglement from “behind the scenes.”

It turns out, however, that some predictions of QM are incompatible
with non-contextuality even for a large and important class of non-local
theories. Experimental results reported in 2007 and 2010 have confirmed
these predictions. To reconcile these results with the current paradigm
would require a profoundly counterintuitive redefinition of what we call
“objectivity.” And since contemporary culture has come to associate
objectivity with reality itself, the science press felt compelled to report
on this by pronouncing, “Quantum physics says goodbye to reality.”

The tension between the anomalies and the current paradigm can only
be tolerated by ignoring the anomalies. This has been possible so far
because the anomalies are only observed in laboratories. Yet we know that
they are there, for their existence has been confirmed beyond reasonable
doubt. Therefore, when we believe that we see objects and events outside
and independent of mind, we are wrong in at least some essential sense. A
new paradigm is needed to accommodate and make sense of the anomalies; one
wherein mind itself is understood to be the essence -- cognitively but also
physically -- of what we perceive when we look at the world around ourselves.
