---
Title: The Ullambana Sutra
---
Nomo homage to the Ullambana Assembly of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

Thus I have heard, at one time, the Buddha dwelt at Shravarsti in the
Garden of the Benefactor of Orphans and the Solitary.

Mahamaudgalyayana had just obtained the six penetrations and wished to
cross over his father and mother to repay their kindness for raising
him.

Thus, using his way eye, he regarded the world and saw that his
deceased mother had been born among the hungry ghosts, having neither
food nor drink, she was but skin and bones.
Mahaudgalayana felt deep pity and sadness, filled a bowl with food and
went to provide for his mother. She got the bowl, screened it with her
left hand, and with her right hand made a fist of food. But, before it
entered her mouth, it turned into burning coals which could not be
eaten.

Mahamaudgalyayana called out and wept sorrowfully, and hastened to
return to the Buddha to set forth all of this.

The Buddha said, "your mother's offenses are deep and firmly rooted.
You alone do not have enough power. Although your filial sounds move
heaven and earth, the heaven spirits, the earth spirits, twisted
demons, and those outside the way, Brahmans, and the four heavenly king
gods, are also without sufficient strength. The awesome spiritual power
of the assembled Sangha of the ten directions is necessary for the
liberation to be attained.

I shall now speak a dharma of rescue, which causes all those in
difficulty to leave worry and suffering, and to eradicate obstacles
from offenses.

The Buddha told Maudgalyayana： "The fifteenth day of the seventh month
is the Pravarana day for the assembled Sangha of the ten directions.
For the sake of fathers and mothers of seven generations past, as well
as for fathers and mothers of the present who are in distress, you
should prepare an offering of clean basins full of hundreds of flavors
and the five fruits, and other offerings of incense, oil, lamps,
candles, beds, and bedding, all the best of the world, to the greatly
virtuous assembled Sangha of the ten directions. On that day, all the
holy assembly, whether in the mountains practicing dhyana samadhi, or
obtaining the four fruits of the way, or walking beneath trees, or
using the independence of the six penetrations, to teach and transform
sound hearers and those enlightened to conditions. Or provisionally
manifesting as bhikshus when in fact they are great Bodhisattvas on the
tenth ground--all complete in pure precepts and oceanlike virtue of the
holy way--should gather in a great assembly and all of like mind
receive the pravarana food.

If one thus makes offerings to these Provarana Sangha, one's present
father and mother, parents of seven generations, as well as the six
kinds of close relatives, will escape from the three paths of
sufferings. And at that time attain release. Their clothing and food
will spontaneously appear. If the parents are still alive, they will
have wealth and blessings for a hundred years. Parents of seven
generations will be born in the heavens. Transformationally born, they
will independently enter the celestial flower light, and experience
limitless bliss.

At that time the Buddha commanded the assembled Sangha of the ten
directions to recite mantras and vows for the sake of the donor's
family, for parents of seven generations.

After practicing dhyana concentration, they then may accept the food.
When first receiving the basin, place it before the Buddha in the
stupa. When the assembled sangha has finished the mantras and vows,
then they may accept it.

At that time the bhikshu Maudgalyayana and the assembly of great
Bodhisattvas were all extremely delighted and the sorrowful sound of
Maudgalyayana's crying ceased.

At that time Maudgalyayana's mother obtained liberation from one kalpa
of suffering as a hungry ghost.

Maudgalyayana addressed the Buddha and said, "this disciple's parents
have received the power of the merit and virtue of the triple jewel,
because of the awesome spiritual power of the assembled Sangha.

If in the future the Buddha's disciples practice filiality by offering
up the Ullambana basins, will they be able to cross over their present
fathers and mothers as well as those of seven generations past?"

The Buddha replied "good indeed, I am happy you asked that question. I
just wanted to speak about that and now you have also asked about it.

Good man, if bhikshus, bhikshunis, kings, crown princes, great
ministers, great officials, cabinet members, the hundreds of officers,
and the tens of thousands of citizens wish to practice compassionate
filial conduct, for the sake of the parents who bore them, as well as
for the sake of fathers and mothers of seven lives past, on the
fifteenth day of the seventh month, the day of the buddhas' delight,
the day of the Sangha's Pravarana, they all should place hundreds of
flavors of foods in the Ullambana basins, and offer them to the
Pravarana Sangha of the ten directions.

They should vow to cause the length of life of the present father and
mother to reach a hundred years without illness, without sufferings,
afflictions, or worries, and also vow to cause seven generations of
fathers and mothers to leave the sufferings of the hungry ghosts, to be
born among men and gods, and to have blessings and bliss without
limit.

The Buddha told all the good men and good women, "those disciples of
the Buddha who cultivate filial conduct should in thought after
thought, constantly recall their present fathers and mothers when
making offerings, as well as the fathers and mothers of seven lives
past. Every year, on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, they
should always, out of filial compassion, recall their parents who bore
them and those of seven lives past, and for their sakes perform the
offering of the Ullambana basin to the Buddha and the Sangha and thus
repay the loving kindness of the parents who raised and nourished them.
All Buddhas' disciples should respectfully receive this dharma."

At that time the bhikshu Maudgalyayana and the four-fold assembly of
disciples, hearing what the Buddha said, practiced it with delight.

End of the Buddha speaks of Ullambana Sutra

True words for repaying parents' kindness.

Na mwo mi li dwo dwo pe ye swo he.
