---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 446
  Source:
    Title: II Peter
    Chapter: II
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Corruption
Reference:
  - Body: Do what thou'wilt shall be the whole of the law
    Source: Aleister Crowley： Symonds, op. cit.. p. 61
  - Body: Thou shall not" was the Mosaic law as Moses gave it out. These
      were the emanations of the Sephiroth. or the Tree of Life. He veiled
      that fact and objectified it for the people, but gave the Priests
      the real meaning in the Talmud
    Source: Baird T. Spalding： India Tour Lessons, Volume IV on Life
      and Teaching of the Masters of the Far East. Los Angeles.
      DeVorss & Co.. 1948. p. 96
  - Body: Praise be to Thee. O Lord, who permittest the forbidden
    Source: Sabbatian formula： cited by G. G. Scholem： Major Trends in
      Jewish Mysticism, New York. Schocken Books. 1941. p. 319.
    Commentary: According to Scholem, a play on words is involved here.
      'Matir Asurim', ’who deliverest the captives', being changed to
      'Matir Issurim', ’who permittest the forbidden.'
---
But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies. ...

And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way
of truth shall be evil spoken of.

And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you; whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not,
and their damnation slumbereth not.

For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to
hell ...

And spared not the old world, but saved Noah ...

And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them
with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after
should live ungodly;

And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked ...

The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished：

But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness,
and despise government. Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are
not afraid to speak evil of dignities.
