---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 513
  Source:
    Title: Majjhima-nikâya
    Sutra: 63
Tags:
  - Life-Love=Faith=Knowledge Through Faith
  - Union-Identity=Holiness-Universal Man
  - 734
  - 239
  - 694
---
Mâlunkyâputta, any one who should say, ‘I will not lead the religious
life under The Blessed One until The Blessed One shall elucidate to
me either that the world is eternal, or that the world is not
eternal, ... or that the saint neither exists nor does not exist after Introd.
death;’ -- that person would die, Mâlunkyâputta, before the Tathâgata
had ever elucidated Holiness this to him.

It is as if, Mâlunkyâputta, a man had been wounded by an arrow thickly
smeared with poison, and his friends and companions, his relatives and
kinsfolk, were to procure for him a physician or surgeon; and the sick
man were to say, ‘I will not have this arrow taken out until I have
learnt whether the man who wounded me belonged to the warrior caste,
or to the Brahman caste, or to the agricultural caste, or to the
menial caste.’...

Or again he were to say, ‘I will not have this arrow taken out until I
have learnt whether the arrow which wounded me was an ordinary arrow,
or a claw-headed arrow, or a vekanda, or an iron arrow, or a
calf-tooth arrow, or a karavirapatta.’ That man would die,
Mâlunkyâputta, without ever having learnt this. ...

The religious life, Mâlunkyâputta, does not depend on the dogma that
the world is Knowl.  eternal; nor does the religious life,
Mâlunkyâputta, depend on the dogma that the world is 734 not eternal.
Whether the dogma obtain, Mâlunkyâputta, that the world is eternal, or
that the world is not eternal, there still remain birth, old age,
death, sorrow, lamentation, misery, Judgment grief, and despair, for
the extinction of which in the present life I am prescribing. 239

Accordingly, Mâlunkyâputta, bear always in mind what it is that I have
not elucidated, and what it is that I have elucidated. And what,
Mâlunkyâputta, have I not elucidated? I have not elucidated,
Mâlunkyâputta, that the world is eternal; I have not elucidated that
the world is not eternal. ... I have not elucidated that the saint
neither exists nor does not exist after death. And why, Mâlunkyâputta,
have I not elucidated this? Because, Mâlunkyâputta, this profits not,
nor has to do with the fundamentals of religion, nor tends to
aversion, absence of passion, cessation, quiescence, the supernatural
faculties, supreme wisdom, and Nirvana; therefore have I not
elucidated it.

And what, Mâlunkyâputta, have I elucidated? Misery, Mâlunkyâputta,
have I elucidated; the origin of misery have I elucidated; the
cessation of misery have I elucidated; and the path leading to the
cessation of misery have I elucidated. And why, Mâlunkyâputta, have I
elucidated this? Because, Mâlunkyâputta, this does profit, has to do
with the fundamentals of religion, and tends to aversion, absence of
passion, cessation, quiescence, Peace knowledge, supreme wisdom, and
Nirvana; therefore have I elucidated it.
