---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 471
  Source:
    Title: St Matthew
    Location: XXIV 24
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
Commentary: |
  One can deceive with words, too. where it is not always easy to
  separate the wheat from the chaff. The following statement, for
  example, taken in isolation, says nothing very wrong： 'Today as
  always, there are men who understand the unity of sciences and the
  unity of creeds.

  'Raising themselves above all religious fanaticism, they demonstrate
  that all creeds are expressions of one and the same religion' (Papus：
  Traité élémentaire de Science occulte, Paris. 7th edit., p. 470). But
  it is the same author who writes： 'Faithful to the eternal law.
  Freemasonry struggles today against the Church in the name of Science.
  It (the Church) wants to do away with all that is opposed to its
  incomplete teaching' (id., p. 468)—an idea which develops logically
  into the following： 'The various sects. . . are moving towards the
  Masonic position, and when they arrive. Masonry will witness a scene
  which she has prophesied for ages.. . . Our little dogmas will have
  their day and cease to be. lost in the vision of a truth so great that
  all men are one in their littleness' (The Rev. J. Fort Newton. The
  Builders, 1949. p. 183： in Walton Hannah： Christian by Degrees,

  London. Augustine Press. 1955. p. 43). Thus, ‘there is slowly rising
  from the ashes of orthodoxy, the actual temple not made by hands,
  eternal in heaven, in man. A great new race of thinkers is coming to
  the fore with herculean strides. Soon the tides will surge over the
  earth to sweep away the debris of delusion which has been strewn over
  the paths of those who are struggling along under the load of
  evolution’ (Baird T. Spalding： op. cit..  vol. III. p. 64).

  The idea is further developed in Ghost Land： ‘The thoughts which
  shone in resplendent imagery before the eyes of my associates and
  myself a quarter of a century ago. have gradually been leavening the
  lump of civilized society during that whole period of time. They have
  been seen in vision, felt in soul, and taught in isolated fragments by
  many a solitary pioneer of the new church that shall be; but chiefly
  has their influence been realized as the radiation of an unknown
  force, whose subtile potencies are making for themselves a lever of
  public opinion, a giant whose will is sufficient to raise up every
  stone in the new temple and put them all in place, a concrete and
  glorious whole, when the stones of thought shall have been hewn each
  in its separate quarry, when every stone shall be fa ir and square and
  true, and ready in its separate perfection to form a part of the
  sublime erection. ...

  ‘The nineteenth century is the last which could appreciate the objects
  of an association contemplating amongst other ideas, the reversal and
  obliteration of all theological myths, and the inauguration of a true
  spiritual kingdom, in which truth itself will be the Bible. God the
  high-priest. ministering spirits the acolytes, and occult science the
  connecting link between the past and the present, the spiritual and
  the natural world. The very few that in this generation are fitted for
  affiliation with this society will be called, as I was. without any
  previous knowledge of its existence; the rest of the world may and
  will seek it in vain’ (pp. 357-358,403).  'Thus in religion.’
  concludes Eliphas Lévi. ‘universal and hierarchical orthodoxy,
  restoration of temples in all their splendour, revival of all
  ceremonies in their pristine pomp, hierarchical teaching of the
  symbol, mysteries, miracles, legends for children, light for grown men
  who will take good care not to scandalize the little ones in the
  simplicity of their belief. There in what concerns religion is our
  whole utopia, and it is also the desire and need of humanity' (Dogme
  et Ritual, p. 360).
---
There shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew
great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they
shall deceive the very elect.
