---
Source:
  - Title: Treasury of Traditional Wisdom
    Page: 425-426
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation=Deviation
  - 75
  - 80
By: Walter Hilton
Reference:
  - Title: Proverbs
    Location: XIV 12
---
An heretic sinneth deadly in pride, for he chooseth his rest and his
delight in his own opinion and his own saying, for he weeneth it
sooth; the which opinion or saying is against God and Holy Kirk. He
will not leave it, but rest him therein, as in a soothfastness; and so
maketh he it his god. But he beguileth himself, for God and Holy Kirk
are so oned and accorded together that who so doth against that one.
doth against both. And therefore he that sayeth he loveth God and
keepeth His biddings, and despiseth Holy Kirk, and setteth at nought
the laws and the ordinances of it made by the head and the sovereign
in governance of all Christian men, he lieth. He chooseth not God, but
he chooseth the love of himself, contrary to the love of God, and so
he sinneth deadly. And in that, that he weeneth most for to please
God, he most displeaseth Him; for he is blind and will not see. Of
this blindness and of this false resting of heretics in their own
feeling, speaketh the Wise Man thus. Est via quae videtur homini
recta; et novissima ejus deducunt ad mortem. There is a way which
seemeth to a man rightful, and the last end of it bringeth him to
endless death.1 This way specially is called heresy, for other fleshly
sinners that sin deadly and lie still therein commonly suppose aye
anon amiss of themselves, and feel biting in conscience that they go
not in the right way. But an heretic supposeth aye that he doth well
and teacheth well, and yet no man so well; and so weeneth he that his
way were the right way, and therefore feeleth he no biting of
conscience, nor meekness in heart. And soothly but if God send him
meekness whilst he liveth, of His mercy, at last end he goeth to hell,
and yet weeneth he for to have done well and get him the bliss of
heaven for his teaching.
