---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 463
  Source:
    Title: Revelation
    Location: XIII 6
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Powers of Darkness
References:
  - Body: |
      The word on the triangle is that Sacred and Mysterious Name you have
      just solemnly engaged yourself never to pronounce, unless in the
      presence and with the assistance of two or more Royal Arch Companions,
      or in the body of a lawfully-constituted Royal Arch Chapter, whilst
      acting as First Principal. It is a compound word, and the combination
      forms the word JAH-BUL-ON. It is in four languages. Chaldee. Hebrew.
      Syriac, and Egyptian. JAH is the Chaldee name of God. signifying “ His
      Essence and Majesty Incomprehensible." It is also a Hebrew word,
      signifying “ I am and shall be.” thereby expressing the actual,
      future, and eternal existence of the Most High. BUL is a Syriac word
      denoting Lord or Powerful, it is in itself a compound word, being
      formed from the preposition Beth, in or on. and Ul. Heaven, or on
      High： therefore the meaning of the word is Lord in Heaven, or on High.
      ON is an Egyptian word, signifying Father of all. thereby expressing
      the Omnipotence of the Father of All. as in that well-known prayer.
      Our Father, which art in Heaven. The various significations of the
      words may be thus collected： I am and shall be： Lord in Heaven or on
      High：

      "Father of All! In every age.

      In every clime adored

      By saint, by savage, and by sage.

      Jehovah. Jove, or Lord.'”
    Source: Mystical Lecture in Royal Arch Degree, Ceremony of Exaltation,
      Hannah： op. cit., pp. 181-182.
    Commentary: The author observes ia a footnote that 'although Masonry
      claims to be founded on the Word of God. this syncretism is as
      blasphemous in an Old Testament setting as. say
      JESUS-MOLOCH-PAN would be to the Christian’.
  - Body: |
      Name that Divinity what you will, the greatest name is the word “God."
      Why? We can show you today that that word vibrates at the rate of one
      hundred and eighty-six billion beats a second, and we know people
      capable of intoning that word. But the beauty of it is. the moment
      that you realize that vibration, you are that vibration every time’
    Source: Baird T. Spalding： op. cit.. vol. V. p. 33
---
And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name.
