---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 454
By: Clement of Alexandria
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Sorcery
  - Sacrifice-Death=Separation-Sin
Reference:
  - Body: |
      Whilst he spoke the professor laid his hand on my head, and continued
      to hold it there, at first with a seemingly slight and accidental
      pressure： but ere he had concluded his address, the weight of that
      hand appeared to me to increase to an almost unendurable extent. Like
      a mountain bearing down upon my shoulders, columns of fiery,
      cloud-like matter seemed to stream from the professor’s fingers, enter
      my whole being, and finally crush me beneath their terrific force into
      a state where resistance, appeal, or even speech was impossible. A
      vague feeling that death was upon me filled my bewildered brain, and a
      sensation of an undefinable yearning to escape from a certain thraldom
      in which I believed myself to be held, oppressed me with agonizing
      force. At length it seemed as if this intense longing for liberation
      was gratified. I stood, and seemed to myself to stand, free of the
      professor’s crushing hand, free of my body, free of every clog or
      chain but an invisible and yet quite tangible cord which connected me
      with the form I had worn, but which now. like a garment I had put off.
      lay sleeping in an easy-chair beneath me I perceived that I was
      treading on a beautiful crystalline form of matter, pure and
      transparent, and hard as a diamond, but sparkling, bright, luminous,
      and ethereal. There was a wonderful atmosphere, too. surrounding me on
      all sides. Above and about me. it was discernible as a radiant,
      sparkling mist, enclosing my form, piercing the walls and ceiling I
      saw, or seemed to see. that I was now all force： that I was soul
      loosed from the body save by the invisible cord which connected me
      with it： also, that I was in the realm of soul, the soul of matter：
      and that as my soul, and the soul-realm in which I had now entered,
      was the real force which kept matter together. I could just as easily
      break the atoms apart and pass through them as one can put a solid
      body into the midst of water or air.
    Source: Ghost Land. pp. 22-23.
---
The wicked, crawling wild beast makes slaves of men by his magical
arts, and torments them even until now, exacting vengeance, as it
seems to me, after the manner of barbarians, who are said to bind
their captives to corpses until both rot together. Certain it is that
wherever this wicked tyrant and serpent succeeds in making men his own
from their birth, he rivets them to stocks, stones, statues and
suchlike idols, by the miserable chain of daemon-worship; then he
takes and buries them alive, as the saying goes, until they also, men
and idols together, suffer corruption.
