---
Source:
  - Title: Treasury of Traditional Wisdom
    Page: 445
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=Corruption
  - 220
By: Sri Ramana Maharshi
References:
  - Body: There exists a drug whose use will open the gates of the
      World behind the Veil of Matter.
    Source: Allan Bennett, alias Brother Iehi Aour. of the Hermetic
      Order of the Golden Dawn; cited by John Symonds： The Great Beast,
      London, Ryder. 1951. p. 28).
  - Body: For an aspiring mystic to revert, in the present state of
      knowledge, to prolonged fasting and violent self-flagellation would be
      as senseless as it would be for an aspiring cook to behave like
      Charles Lamb's Chinaman, who burned down the house in order to roast a
      pig. Knowing as he does (or at least as he can know, if he so desires)
      what are the chemical conditions of transcendental experience, the
      aspiring mystic should turn for technical help to the
      specialists -- in pharmacology, in biochemistry, in physiology
      and neurology, in psychology and psychiatry and parapsychology.
    Source: Aldous Huxley： Heaven and Hell, London. Chatto &
      Windus. 1956. p. 64
  - Body: This society, which I shall call for distinction's sake the
      “Berlin Brotherhood". ... had discovered, by repeated experiments,
      that spiritual forms could become visible to the material under
      certain conditions, the most favorable of which were somnambulism
      procured through the magnetic sleep. This state, they had found, could
      be induced sometimes by drugs, vapors, and aromal essences： sometimes
      by spells, as through music, intently staring into crystals, the eyes
      of snakes, running water, or other glittering substances：
      occasionally by intoxication caused by dancing, spinning around, or
      distracting clamors： but the best and most efficacious method of
      exalting the spirit into the superior world and putting the body to
      sleep was. as they had proved, through animal magnetism. They taught
      that in the realms of spiritual existence were beings who composed the
      fragmentary and unorganized parts of humanity, as well as beings of
      higher orders than humanity. ... Thus they invoked their presence by
      magical rites, and sought to obtain control over them, for the purpose
      of wresting from them the complete understanding of and power over the
      secrets of nature.
    Source: Ghost Land; or Researches into the Mysteries of Occultism,
      anonymous, tr. and edit, by Emma Hardinge Britten. Boston.
      1876, pp. 33-35
---
If you are so anxious for trance any narcotic will bring it about.
Drug-habit will be the result and not liberation. There are vâsanas
(habits of mind) in the latent state even in trance. The vâsanas must
be destroyed.
