---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 458
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Synagogue of Satan
  - Prejudice=Anti-Semitism
  - 442
  - 313
By: Sixtus of Siena
References:
  - Body: |
      The goat shown in our frontispiece wears on his forehead the sign of
      the pentagram, the point facing upwards, which suffices to make it a
      symbol of light： with his two hands he makes the sign of occultism,
      and points above to the white moon of Chesed. and below to the black
      moon of Geburah. This sign expresses the perfect accord of mercy with
      justice. One of his arms is feminine, the other masculine The torch of
      intelligence which glows between his horns is the magic light of
      universal equilibrium： it is also the figure of the soul elevated
      above matter, while clinging to matter itself, as the flame clings to
      the torch. The hideous head of the animal expresses horror at sin The
      caduceus. which takes the place of the organ of generation.
      represents eternal life： the belly covered with scales is the water：
      the circle above it is the atmosphere： the feathers which come next
      signify the volatile： humanity in turn is represented by the two
      breasts and the androgynous arms of this sphinx of the occult
      sciences.

      So behold the shadows of the infernal sanctuary scattered, behold the
      sphinx who was the terror of the Middle Ages exposed and precipitated
      from his throne： quomodo cecidisti, Lucifer? The terrible Baphomet is
      nothing more (as with all the enigmatical and monstrous idols of
      ancient science and its dreams) than an innocent and even pious
      hieroglyph. ... In the sacred gems of the Gnostic Christians who
      belonged to the sect of Basilides. one finds representations of the
      Christ under divers figures of animals in the Kabbala： sometimes it
      is a bull, sometimes a lion, sometimes a serpent with a lion's or
      bull's head： he always wears at the same time the attributes of
      light, like our goat, whose sign of the pentagram prevents mistaking
      him for the fabulous images of Satan.

      Let us say good and loudly, to combat the vestiges of Manicheanism
      which still show up every day among our Christians, that Satan, as a
      higher personality and as a power, does not exist. Satan is the
      personification of all errors, all perversities, and by consequence,
      all weaknesses. If God can be defined as he who necessarily exists,
      can one not define his antagonist and his enemy as he who necessarily
      does not exist? ...

      As for the name of the Sabbath ... the simplest etymology for us is
      that which has this word come from the Jewish Sabbath, for it is
      certain that the Jews, the most faithful depositaries of the secrets
      of the Kabbala. have almost always in magic been the grand masters of
      the Middle Ages.

      The Sabbath was therefore the Sunday of the Cabalists. the day of
      their religious feast, or rather, the night of their regular assembly.
      This feast, surrounded in mystery, had as a safeguard the dread of the
      common people and escaped persecution through terror. ...

      Someone wrote us recently that the very respectable Father Ventura,
      former superior of the Theatines.  examiner of bishops, etc.. etc..
      after having read our dogma, declared that the Kabbala. in his eyes,
      was an invention of the devil My venerable masters of theology, you
      are more sorcerers than one thinks and than you yourselves think： and
      he who said： The devil is a liar like his father, might well also
      have some little things to say concerning the question of your
      paternity.
    Source: Eliphas Lévi： Dogme el rituel de la Haute Magie, Paris. Éditions
      Niclaus. reprinted 1952. pp. 282-288. passim
  - Body: The old idea of the devil ... is a direct violation of the fact that
      there is only the power of God. There is no power opposed to the
      ultimate good in the universal trend.
    Source: Baird T. Spalding： op. cit.. vol. IV. p. 60
---
Since by the decree of the Holy Roman Inquisition all books
apertaining to the Cabala have lately been condemned, one must know
that the Cabala is double; that one is true, the other false. The true
and pious one is that which ... elucidates the secret mysteries of
the holy law according to the principle of anagogy (i.e. figurative
interpretation). This Cabala therefore the Church has never condemned.
The false and impious Cabala is a certain mendacious kind of Jewish
tradition, full of innumerable vanities and falsehoods, differing but
little from necromancy. This kind of superstition, therefore,
improperly called Cabala, the Church within the last few years has
deservedly condemned.
