---
Source:
  ID: 20c3721c-2af4-449e-a9c0-9791ceb9b9ae
  Location:
    Page: 469
  Source:
    Title: Surangama Sutra
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Subversion-The Wrathful Side=The Last Times
  - 423
  - 430
References:
  - Body: |
      I was calling my family to dinner when I stooped over to brush a
      mosquito off my leg, and I noticed a flash of light. 1 looked up and
      out through the screen door and I saw a blue mist behind the ash trees
      in the farm yard, opposite the kitchen door. Then the mist, as it
      descended, became the figure of the Blessed Virgin. Oh. she was so
      radiant, so beautiful! An artist couldn't paint her to do her justice.

      I walked out into the yard. She smiled at me as 1 approached
      her. She said. "You are not afraid, my child, you have been expecting
      me. My child, eat a twig. My speaking to you on Good Friday was a test
      to your community.. . . Only about ten percent of them are devoted and
      pray the Rosary very devoutly. This ten per cent does not include your
      parish priest. Mater Christi Home, or the Sisters. ...

      "All religions must work together against the enemies of God.
      You must love thy neighbor (sic), you must live the Commandments... .
      My warnings at Fatima are my pleas for prayers, the Rosary, repentance
      for sins and making sacrifices to save souls.

      "There are many religions that claim they can see their dead
      come back. These are false claims, works of trained fakers. Only
      canonized saints appear to people. These false claims make it hard for
      us, as people lose faith”
    Source: |
      Mrs VanHoof. and Our Lady of Necedah： Anne Stuart： Our Lady of
      Necedah. 1950. passim
    Commentary: |
      These false claims also make it hard for the Church. The
      following dispatch from Vatican City appeared in a Cairo paper： 'The
      Osservalore Romano publishes a note in which Mgr. Alfredo Ottaviani.
      assessor to the Holy Office, warns the faithful against miraculous
      manifestations— notably those of Voltago in Italy. Espis and Bouxieres
      in France. Hamsur in Belgium. Herolsbach in Germany, and Necedah in
      the United States (Wisconsin).

      The prelate points out in substance that the credulity of the
      faithful in these manifestations can be injurious to the cause of true
      miracles, and he recalls how the Church has always shown a
      comprehensible prudence in this domain.’
---
After my Parinirvana, in the last kalpa of this world, there will be
plenty of these goblin-heretics about, hiding themselves within the
very personalities of the saints, the better to carry out their
deceiving tricks. Sometimes they gain control of some great and good
Master and teach under the prestige of his name. They often assert
that they have received their Dharma from some notable Master,
deceiving ignorant people, discouraging them and even causing them to
go insane. In such deceptive ways do they spread their false and
destructive heresies.
