---
Title: Smokey the Bear Sutra
Author: Gary Snyder
---
Once in the Jurassic about 150 million years ago, the Great Sun Buddha in
this corner of the Infinite Void gave a discourse to all the assembled
elements and energies： to the standing beings, the walking beings, the
flying beings, and the sitting beings--even the grasses, to the number of
thirteen billion, each one born from a seed, assembled there： a Discourse
concerning Enlightenment on the planet Earth.

"In some future time, there will be a continent called America. It will have
great centers of power called such as Pyramid Lake, Walden Pond, Mt.
Rainier, Big Sur, Everglades, and so forth; and powerful nerves and channels
such as Columbia River, Mississippi River, and Grand Canyon. The human race
in that era will get into troubles all over its head, and practically wreck
everything in spite of its own strong intelligent Buddha-nature."

"The twisting strata of the great mountains and the pulsings of volcanoes
are my love burning deep in the earth. My obstinate compassion is schist and
basalt and granite, to be mountains, to bring down the rain. In that future
American Era I shall enter a new form; to cure the world of loveless
knowledge that seeks with blind hunger： and mindless rage eating food that
will not fill it."

And he showed himself in his true form of

SMOKEY THE BEAR

A handsome smokey-colored brown bear standing on his hind legs, showing that
he is aroused and watchful.

Bearing in his right paw the Shovel that digs to the truth beneath
appearances; cuts the roots of useless attachments, and flings damp sand on
the fires of greed and war;

His left paw in the mudra of Comradely Display--indicating that all
creatures have the full right to live to their limits and that of deer,
rabbits, chipmunks, snakes, dandelions, and lizards all grow in the realm of
the Dharma;

Wearing the blue work overalls symbolic of slaves and laborers, the
countless men oppressed by a civilization that claims to save but often
destroys;

Wearing the broad-brimmed hat of the west, symbolic of the forces that guard
the wilderness, which is the Natural State of the Dharma and the true path
of man on Earth：

all true paths lead through mountains--

With a halo of smoke and flame behind, the forest fires of the kali-yuga,
fires caused by the stupidity of those who think things can be gained and
lost whereas in truth all is contained vast and free in the Blue Sky and
Green Earth of One Mind;

Round-bellied to show his kind nature and that the great earth has food
enough for everyone who loves her and trusts her;

Trampling underfoot wasteful freeways and needless suburbs, smashing the
worms of capitalism and totalitarianism;

Indicating the task： his followers, becoming free of cars, houses, canned
foods, universities, and shoes, master the Three Mysteries of their own
Body, Speech, and Mind; and fearlessly chop down the rotten trees and prune
out the sick limbs of this country America and then burn the leftover trash.

Wrathful but calm. Austere but Comic. Smokey the Bear will Illuminate those
who would help him; but for those who would hinder or slander him...

HE WILL PUT THEM OUT.

Thus his great Mantra：

Namah samanta vajranam chanda maharoshana Sphataya hum traka ham mam

"I DEDICATE MYSELF TO THE UNIVERSAL DIAMOND BE THIS RAGING FURY BE
DESTROYED"

And he will protect those who love the woods and rivers, Gods and animals,
hobos and madmen, prisoners and sick people, musicians, playful women, and
hopeful children：

And if anyone is threatened by advertising, air pollution, television, or
the police, they should chant SMOKEY THE BEAR'S WAR SPELL：

DROWN THEIR BUTTS

CRUSH THEIR BUTTS

DROWN THEIR BUTTS

CRUSH THEIR BUTTS

And SMOKEY THE BEAR will surely appear to put the enemy out with his
vajra-shovel.

Now those who recite this Sutra and then try to put it in practice will
accumulate merit as countless as the sands of Arizona and Nevada.

Will help save the planet Earth from total oil slick.
Will enter the age of harmony of man and nature.
Will win the tender love and caresses of men, women, and beasts.
Will always have ripened blackberries to eat and a sunny spot under a pine
tree to sit at.
AND IN THE END WILL WIN HIGHEST PERFECT ENLIGHTENMENT

...thus we have heard...

(may be reproduced free forever)
