---
Source:
  - Title: Treasury of Traditional Wisdom
    Page: 424-425
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Heterodoxy And Deviation=Deviation
  - 275
  - 170
By: Nicholas of Cusa
Description: To the Bohemians on double communication
---
You are wrong in thinking that more profit is to be had from drinking
the chalice of separation than from using the one pascal lamb in peace
and unity. To receive with a separatist will the chalice of the Lord
of unity and peace, is to receive it in vain, for it cannot confer
life to a member separated from this Church which is the body of
Christ. Do not say that it is the rest of the Church which has
separated from you, and that you constitute the true Church, reduced
to this little part of Bohemia. Assuredly, in the unity of the Church
the diversity of rites is without danger— something which no one would
question. But if a person rashly and presumptuously values a
partiçular rite above unity and peace, then be he ever so good, holy
and worthy of praise, he still merits condemnation. You say that one
must first obey the precepts of Christ, and only afterwards the
Church, and that if the Church teaches other precepts than those of
Christ, then it is not the Church but Christ whom one must obey. Now
here precisely is the beginning of all presumption, when individuals
judge their own private opinion concerning the divine commandments as
being more in conformity with the divine Will than is the attitude of
the universal Church. ...

Therefore one must follow the Church without fail when it determines
what is best in each instance, for it possesses the faith and
conserves the accumulated store, even if some error may slip into its
judgment. The case is the same as with a judge who, misled by a false
witness, excommunicates an innocent person, without consciously
committing a reprehensible act. This judge does not transgress, but on
the contrary follows the rule which obliges him to judge according to
witnesses and proofs. And the innocent party, in obeying the sentence
and thus separating himself from the body of the Church, does not lose
the grace and life which come from the sacraments, but by obeying the
Church even if it is wrong, he obtains salvation, even though deprived
of the sacraments.
