---
Source:
  - Title: Treasury of Traditional Wisdom
    Page: 368-369
  - Title: The Sophic Hydrolith
Tags:
  - Combat-Action=Pilgrimage-Descent Into Hell=The Descent Into Hell
  - 509
Commentary: |
  Mention must also be made of the excesses to which the unguarded
  imagination can lead, and which might be called mythomania, or the
  "lunatic fringe'： two examples will suffice. The first is from Don
  Quixote： "In fine, he gave himself up so wholly to the reading of
  Romances, that a-Nights he would pore on 'till 'twas Day. and a-Days
  he would read on 'till 'twas Night： and thus by sleeping little, and
  reading much, the Moisture of his Brain was exhausted to that Degree,
  that at last he lost the Use of his Reason. A world of disorderly
  Notions, pick'd out of his Books, crowded into his Imagination： and
  now his Head was full of nothing but Inchantments. Quarrels. Battles.
  Challenges. Wounds. Complaints.  Amours. Torments, and abundance of
  Stuff and Impossibilities; insomuch, that all the Fables and
  fantastical Tales which he read, seem’d to him now as true as the most
  authentick Histories’ (I. i. 1 ： tr. Peter Motteux.  revised by
  Ozell, Modem Library, 1930 p. 3).

  The second illustration is offered in Reginald Scot's Discoverie of
  Witchcraft：

  "And they have so fraid us with bull-beggars. spirits, witches,
  urchins, elves, hags, fairies, satyrs, pans, faunes, syrens, kit with
  the can sticke. tritons, centaurs, dwarfes.  giantes. imps, calcars,
  conjurors, nvmphes.  changelings, incubus. Robin-goodfellow. the
  spoorne. the mare, the man in the oke. the hell-waine. the fier drake,
  the puckle. Tom Thomoe. hobgoblins. Tom Tumbler, boneless, and such
  other bugs, that we were afraid of our own shadowes' (cited by
  Washington Irving in his essay "Stratford-on-Avon' from his Sketch
  Book).
---
While the digestion of the dead spiritual body in man goes forward,
there may be seen (as in the chemical process) many variegated colours
and signs, i.e., all manner of sufferings, afflictions, and
tribulations, including the ceaseless assaults of the Devil, the
world, and the flesh. But all these signs are of good omen, since they
show that such a man will at length reach the desired goal. For
Scripture tells us that all that are to obtain the eternal beatitude
of Christ must be persecuted in this world, and we must enter into the
kingdom of heaven through much tribulation and anguish.
